docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanations/decisions/forgejo.adoc, before:

= Forgejo / Codey

This page discusses the technical details for our two products https://products.vshn.ch/appcat/forgejo.html[Forgejo by VSHN^] and https://products.vshn.ch/codey.html[Codey^]: Fully managed, dedicated https://forgejo.org/[Forgejo^] instances.

Codey is a product name for a very specific configuration and product offering of Forgejo by VSHN.
Codey won't be available on the regular in-cluster VSHN AppCat offering, only Forgejo by VSHN will.
An instance of Codey has to be ordered via the Codey SaaS website and is running on pre-defined "black-box" OpenShift OKE service clusters to which the customer doesn't have access to.

The offering of Codey combines compute resources, storage and the managed service into a pre-defined package.

Main differences between Forgejo by VSHN and Codey:

[cols=",,",options="header"]
|===
|
|Forgejo by VSHN
|Codey

h|Compute and Storage
|not included
|included

h|Resource Restrictions
|depending on underlying infrastructure
|constraint be the <<Codey Plans, product plan>>

h|Instance Location
|depends on the underlying cluster
|pre-defined by Codey

h|Configuration Flexibility
|most options can be configured
|only few options are exposed
|===

== Restrictions of Forgejo Features

Due to technical limitations, we cannot support all possible features of Forgejo.
This section lists some of these restrictions.

Git access::
Git access is currently only possible via HTTPS, SSH is not supported.
Supporting SSH would either require to expose a plain TCP service which inclines the use of a `LoadBalancer` type service, or making use of the PROXY protocol and configure `SSH_SERVER_USE_PROXY_PROTOCOL`.
While not impossible, it complicates the configuration by a lot.

Forgejo Actions::
https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/actions/[Forgejo Actions^] are fully supported, but the https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/runner-installation/[Actions runner^] need to be provided by the user right now.
We plan to add a managed runner in the future as well.

Exposed configuration options::
Many features of Forgejo are configured in the `app.ini` file and not via the web interface.
We expose https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/config-cheat-sheet/[configuration options^] through the <<Deployment>> configuration.

High availability::
We currently don't offer a https://code.forgejo.org/forgejo-helm/forgejo-helm/src/branch/main/docs/ha-setup.md[highly available^] option of Forgejo.
If there is demand, we'll implement it.

== Deployment

Deployment and configuration of Forgejo happens with the official https://code.forgejo.org/forgejo-helm/forgejo-helm[upstream Helm Chart^] and the https://github.com/crossplane-contrib/provider-helm[Crossplane Provider for Helm^].
In the Crossplane Composite Resource Definition (XRD) we expose all required parameters.

We differentiate between Forgejo by VSHN and Codey by exposing a different XRD, depending on the service.

=== Forgejo by VSHN

For Forgejo by VSHN we expose many configuration options.
This also implies that the user has to take care of several configuration options themselves, like configuring a suitable SMTP server or choosing the right database option. We provide <<Forgejo Configuration, sensible defaults>> though.

.Claim
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
kind: VSHNForgejo
metadata:
  name: my-forgejo-prod
spec:
  parameters:
    service:
      majorVersion: "9"
      fqdn: poc.mydomain.com <1>
      adminEmail: admin@example.com <2>
      forgejoSettings:
        config: <3>
          APP_NAME: "My Code Forge"
          mailer:
            ENABLED: "true"
            PROTOCOL: smtps
            SMTP_ADDR: mail.example.com
            SMTP_PORT: "465"
            USER: forgejo
        additionalConfigFromEnvs:
        - name: FORGEJO__MAILER__PASSWD
          valueFrom:
            secretKeyRef:
              name: my-passwords
              key: MAILER_PASSWD
    backup: 
      schedule: "30 23 * * *"
      retention: 12
    extraSecrets:
    - name: my-passwords
  writeConnectionSecretToRef:
    name: forgejo-creds
----
<1> The FQDN is passed to the Helm values on several places, for example `.ingress.*`, `.gitea.config.server.DOMAIN` and others.
<2> Used for the Helm Chart value `.gitea.admin.email`
<3> This is passed to the Helm Chart at `.gitea`. Some values will be overwritten, some values will be added. To be figured out which exactly we allow.

Injected configuration values:

* `.gitea.admin`: Handled by the Composition and exposed in the connection secret.

See also <<Forgejo by VSHN Helm Values>>.

=== Codey

Codey only offers very few configuration options, compared to Forgejo by VSHN.
It also has <<Codey Plans, pre-defined plans>> which set the compute and storage requests, limits and database choices accordingly.

The XRD for Codey is implemented by a different Composition than Forgejo by VSHN.
It instantiates a pre-configured Composite Resource of Forgejo by VSHN.
Think of `Codey` being the template for a `XVSHNForgejo` Composite Resource.

.Claim
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
kind: Codey
metadata:
  name: my-codey-prod
spec:
  parameters:
    service:
      majorVersion: "9"
      adminEmail: admin@example.com <1>
    size: 
      plan: mini <2>
  writeConnectionSecretToRef:
    name: codey-creds
----
<1> Used for the Helm Chart value `.gitea.admin.email`
<2> <<Codey Plans, Codey plan>>

Notes:

* The FQDN is automatically set to `.metadata.name`.app.codey.ch
* We use a default configuration for all Codey instances, for example we use Mailgun to send E-Mail

See also <<Codey Composite Resource Template>>.

== Codey Plans

Codey offers several plans, which define the sizing and other affecting parameters.
See also https://products.vshn.ch/codey.html#_pricing[Product Documentation^] and https://www.codey.ch/#Beginner[Codey Website^].

[cols=",,,,",options="header"]
|===
|
|Mini
|Small
|Medium
|Large

|Recommended Users Max.
|2
|10
|100
|500

|<<Database>>
|SQLite
|SQLite
|PostgreSQL
|PostgreSQL

|<<Storage>>
|10 GiB
|50 GiB
|200 GiB
|500 GiB

|<<Cache>>
|TwoQueue (2Q)
|TwoQueue (2Q)
|Redis by VSHN
|Redis by VSHN

|<<Queue>>
|LevelDB
|LevelDB
|Redis by VSHN
|Redis by VSHN

|<<Kubernetes Resource Configuration, Kubernetes Resources>>
|See <<Kubernetes Resource Configuration, below>>
|See <<Kubernetes Resource Configuration, below>>
|See <<Kubernetes Resource Configuration, below>>
|See <<Kubernetes Resource Configuration, below>>

|===

=== Plan Upgrade / Downgrade

Plans can be changed anytime, as long as the database stays the same.
Changing between plans with different databases is currently not supported.
It will be offered once the process of changing databases is automated.

== Forgejo Configuration

In this section the Forgejo configuration decisions are documented.

For Forgejo by VSHN the user can choose various options themselves, but we set reasonable defaults, as documented in this section.
In Codey, the choices are given by the <<Codey Plans, plan>>.

=== Database

There are several options for the database, most prominently PostgreSQL and SQLite.

Default:: https://products.vshn.ch/appcat/postgresql.html[PostgreSQL by VSHN^]
Offered Choices:: PostgreSQL, SQLite

Migration between different databases can be done with the https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/command-line/#dump[`forgejo dump`] command.

Ref: https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/recommendations/#databasedb_type[Recommended Settings and Tips: Database^]

=== Storage

We use local storage for everything, therefore a PVC is mounted to `/data`.

While we could also use object storage for most of the data, it complicates a lot.
For example backup would become an additional burden, as well as storage space monitoring also won't be that easy anymore.
And it's not possible to store Git repositories on object storage, this way we'd have multiple storage locations.

Ref: https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/storage/[Admin documentation: Storage^]

=== Cache

There are several options for caching, most prominently Redis and TwoQueue.

Default:: https://products.vshn.ch/appcat/redis.html[Redis by VSHN^]
Offered Choices:: Redis, `twoqueue`

`twoqueue` uses the recommended configuration for the `HOST` parameter:

----
{"size":100, "recent_ratio":0.25, "ghost_ratio":0.5} 
----

Refs:

* https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/config-cheat-sheet/#cache-cache[Configuration Cheat Sheet: Cache^]
* https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/recommendations/#cacheadapter[Recommended Settings and Tips: Cache^]

=== Queue

There are several options for queuing, most prominently Redis and https://github.com/google/leveldb[LevelDB^].

Default:: https://products.vshn.ch/appcat/redis.html[Redis by VSHN^]
Offered Choices:: Redis, `level`

Ref: https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/config-cheat-sheet/#queue-queue-and-queue[Configuration Cheat Sheet: Queue^]

== Backup and Restore

Two mechanisms are used for Backup:

File-based data::
K8up regularly stores the content of `/data` in the backup destination.
Restoring happens with K8up mechanisms to get the files back into the `/data` directory.

Database::
We'll use https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/command-line/#dump[`forgejo dump`] as a https://docs.k8up.io/k8up/2.11/how-tos/application-aware-backups.html[backup command^] for K8up.
Restoring is currently a manual process, there is no `forgejo restore` command available.

== Metrics and Monitoring

We enable the `/metrics` endpoint and scrape metrics accordingly.
See xref:attachment$example-forgejo-metrics.txt[example-forgejo-metrics.txt] for a list of available metrics.

By using the provided https://codeberg.org/forgejo/forgejo/src/branch/forgejo/contrib/gitea-monitoring-mixin[Monitoring Mixin^] we get Grafana dashboards.

Alerting is done on the availability of the service.

For Codey, we monitor `gitea_users` and compare the number to the chosen plan.
Should the number of users exceed the plan, an alert is raised so that we can contact the customer.

== E-Mail

Forgejo needs to send E-Mails and optionally can also receive E-Mails for issue handling.

Sending via SMTP::
Codey uses Mailgun to send E-Mails with noreply@codey.ch as sender address.
Forgejo by VSHN exposes the configuration parameters to configure the SMTP service.

Receiving via IMAP::
E-Mail receiving works by regularly getting E-Mails from an IMAP mailbox.
This is a manual configuration and only supported in Forgejo by VSHN version.

Refs:

* https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/email-setup/[Email setup^]
* https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/incoming-email/[Incoming Email^]

== Kubernetes Resource Configuration

We set appropriate Kubernetes resources, depending on the service type.

=== Forgejo by VSHN

TODO

=== Codey

[cols=",,,",options="header"]
|===
|Plan
|Requests
|Limits
|Storage

|Mini
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|10 GiB

|Small
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|50 GiB

|Medium
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|200 GiB

|Large
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|500 GiB

|===

== Links

* https://code.forgejo.org/forgejo-helm/forgejo-helm[Official Helm Chart^]
* https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/[Forgejo Documentation^]
* https://code.forgejo.org/infrastructure/k8s-cluster[Forgejo project infrastructure^]

== Default Configurations

=== Forgejo by VSHN Helm Values

WARNING: WIP. Currently Redis connections don't work yet, because `failed: remote error: tls: certificate required`.

[source,yaml]
----
include::attachment$example-forgejo-helm-values.yaml[]
----

Download: xref:attachment$example-forgejo-helm-values.yaml[example-forgejo-helm-values.yaml]

=== Codey Composite Resource Template

WARNING: WIP. Needs proper definition...

.Composite Resource
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
kind: XVSHNForgejo
metadata:
  name: my-codey-prod
spec:
  parameters:
    service:
      majorVersion: "9"
      fqdn: poc.mydomain.com
      adminEmail: admin@example.com
      forgejoSettings:
        config:
          APP_NAME: "Codey"
          mailer:
            ENABLED: "true"
            PROTOCOL: smtps
            SMTP_ADDR: mail.example.com
            SMTP_PORT: "465"
            USER: forgejo
        additionalConfigFromEnvs:
        - name: FORGEJO__MAILER__PASSWD
          valueFrom:
            secretKeyRef:
              name: my-passwords
              key: MAILER_PASSWD
    backup: 
      schedule: "30 23 * * *"
      retention: 12
    extraSecrets:
    - name: my-passwords
----

Old Helm Values: xref:attachment$example-forgejo-helm-values-codey.yaml[example-forgejo-helm-values-codey.yaml]

Commit message:

use distinct api version and backup only with dump

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanations/decisions/forgejo.adoc, after:

= Forgejo / Codey

This page discusses the technical details for our two products https://products.vshn.ch/appcat/forgejo.html[Forgejo by VSHN^] and https://products.vshn.ch/codey.html[Codey^]: Fully managed, dedicated https://forgejo.org/[Forgejo^] instances.

Codey is a product name for a very specific configuration and product offering of Forgejo by VSHN.
Codey won't be available on the regular in-cluster VSHN AppCat offering, only Forgejo by VSHN will.
An instance of Codey has to be ordered via the Codey SaaS website and is running on pre-defined "black-box" OpenShift OKE service clusters to which the customer doesn't have access to.

The offering of Codey combines compute resources, storage and the managed service into a pre-defined package.

Main differences between Forgejo by VSHN and Codey:

[cols=",,",options="header"]
|===
|
|Forgejo by VSHN
|Codey

h|Compute and Storage
|not included
|included

h|Resource Restrictions
|depending on underlying infrastructure
|constraint be the <<Codey Plans, product plan>>

h|Instance Location
|depends on the underlying cluster
|pre-defined by Codey

h|Configuration Flexibility
|most options can be configured
|only few options are exposed
|===

== Restrictions of Forgejo Features

Due to technical limitations, we cannot support all possible features of Forgejo.
This section lists some of these restrictions.

Git access::
Git access is currently only possible via HTTPS, SSH is not supported.
Supporting SSH would either require to expose a plain TCP service which inclines the use of a `LoadBalancer` type service, or making use of the PROXY protocol and configure `SSH_SERVER_USE_PROXY_PROTOCOL`.
While not impossible, it complicates the configuration by a lot.

Forgejo Actions::
https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/actions/[Forgejo Actions^] are fully supported, but the https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/runner-installation/[Actions runner^] need to be provided by the user right now.
We plan to add a managed runner in the future as well.

Exposed configuration options::
Many features of Forgejo are configured in the `app.ini` file and not via the web interface.
We expose https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/config-cheat-sheet/[configuration options^] through the <<Deployment>> configuration.

High availability::
We currently don't offer a https://code.forgejo.org/forgejo-helm/forgejo-helm/src/branch/main/docs/ha-setup.md[highly available^] option of Forgejo.
If there is demand, we'll implement it.

== Deployment

Deployment and configuration of Forgejo happens with the official https://code.forgejo.org/forgejo-helm/forgejo-helm[upstream Helm Chart^] and the https://github.com/crossplane-contrib/provider-helm[Crossplane Provider for Helm^].
In the Crossplane Composite Resource Definition (XRD) we expose all required parameters.

We differentiate between Forgejo by VSHN and Codey by exposing a different XRD, depending on the service.

=== Forgejo by VSHN

For Forgejo by VSHN we expose many configuration options.
This also implies that the user has to take care of several configuration options themselves, like configuring a suitable SMTP server or choosing the right database option. We provide <<Forgejo Configuration, sensible defaults>> though.

.Claim
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
kind: VSHNForgejo
metadata:
  name: my-forgejo-prod
spec:
  parameters:
    service:
      majorVersion: "9"
      fqdn: poc.mydomain.com <1>
      adminEmail: admin@example.com <2>
      forgejoSettings:
        config: <3>
          APP_NAME: "My Code Forge"
          mailer:
            ENABLED: "true"
            PROTOCOL: smtps
            SMTP_ADDR: mail.example.com
            SMTP_PORT: "465"
            USER: forgejo
        additionalConfigFromEnvs:
        - name: FORGEJO__MAILER__PASSWD
          valueFrom:
            secretKeyRef:
              name: my-passwords
              key: MAILER_PASSWD
    backup: 
      schedule: "30 23 * * *"
      retention: 12
    extraSecrets:
    - name: my-passwords
  writeConnectionSecretToRef:
    name: forgejo-creds
----
<1> The FQDN is passed to the Helm values on several places, for example `.ingress.*`, `.gitea.config.server.DOMAIN` and others.
<2> Used for the Helm Chart value `.gitea.admin.email`
<3> This is passed to the Helm Chart at `.gitea`. Some values will be overwritten, some values will be added. To be figured out which exactly we allow.

Injected configuration values:

* `.gitea.admin`: Handled by the Composition and exposed in the connection secret.

See also <<Forgejo by VSHN Helm Values>>.

=== Codey

Codey only offers very few configuration options, compared to Forgejo by VSHN.
It also has <<Codey Plans, pre-defined plans>> which set the compute and storage requests, limits and database choices accordingly.

The XRD for Codey is implemented by a different Composition than Forgejo by VSHN.
It instantiates a pre-configured Composite Resource of Forgejo by VSHN.
Think of `Codey` being the template for a `XVSHNForgejo` Composite Resource.

.Claim
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: codey.io/v1
kind: Instance
metadata:
  name: my-codey-prod
spec:
  parameters:
    service:
      majorVersion: "9"
      adminEmail: admin@example.com <1>
    size: 
      plan: mini <2>
  writeConnectionSecretToRef:
    name: codey-creds
----
<1> Used for the Helm Chart value `.gitea.admin.email`
<2> <<Codey Plans, Codey plan>>

Notes:

* The FQDN is automatically set to `.metadata.name`.app.codey.ch
* We use a default configuration for all Codey instances, for example we use Mailgun to send E-Mail

See also <<Codey Composite Resource Template>>.

== Codey Plans

Codey offers several plans, which define the sizing and other affecting parameters.
See also https://products.vshn.ch/codey.html#_pricing[Product Documentation^] and https://www.codey.ch/#Beginner[Codey Website^].

[cols=",,,,",options="header"]
|===
|
|Mini
|Small
|Medium
|Large

|Recommended Users Max.
|2
|10
|100
|500

|<<Database>>
|SQLite
|SQLite
|PostgreSQL
|PostgreSQL

|<<Storage>>
|10 GiB
|50 GiB
|200 GiB
|500 GiB

|<<Cache>>
|TwoQueue (2Q)
|TwoQueue (2Q)
|Redis by VSHN
|Redis by VSHN

|<<Queue>>
|LevelDB
|LevelDB
|Redis by VSHN
|Redis by VSHN

|<<Kubernetes Resource Configuration, Kubernetes Resources>>
|See <<Kubernetes Resource Configuration, below>>
|See <<Kubernetes Resource Configuration, below>>
|See <<Kubernetes Resource Configuration, below>>
|See <<Kubernetes Resource Configuration, below>>

|===

=== Plan Upgrade / Downgrade

Plans can be changed anytime, as long as the database stays the same.
Changing between plans with different databases is currently not supported.
It will be offered once the process of changing databases is automated.

== Forgejo Configuration

In this section the Forgejo configuration decisions are documented.

For Forgejo by VSHN the user can choose various options themselves, but we set reasonable defaults, as documented in this section.
In Codey, the choices are given by the <<Codey Plans, plan>>.

=== Database

There are several options for the database, most prominently PostgreSQL and SQLite.

Default:: https://products.vshn.ch/appcat/postgresql.html[PostgreSQL by VSHN^]
Offered Choices:: PostgreSQL, SQLite

Migration between different databases can be done with the https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/command-line/#dump[`forgejo dump`] command.

Ref: https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/recommendations/#databasedb_type[Recommended Settings and Tips: Database^]

=== Storage

We use local storage for everything, therefore a PVC is mounted to `/data`.

While we could also use object storage for most of the data, it complicates a lot.
For example backup would become an additional burden, as well as storage space monitoring also won't be that easy anymore.
And it's not possible to store Git repositories on object storage, this way we'd have multiple storage locations.

Ref: https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/storage/[Admin documentation: Storage^]

=== Cache

There are several options for caching, most prominently Redis and TwoQueue.

Default:: https://products.vshn.ch/appcat/redis.html[Redis by VSHN^]
Offered Choices:: Redis, `twoqueue`

`twoqueue` uses the recommended configuration for the `HOST` parameter:

----
{"size":100, "recent_ratio":0.25, "ghost_ratio":0.5} 
----

Refs:

* https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/config-cheat-sheet/#cache-cache[Configuration Cheat Sheet: Cache^]
* https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/recommendations/#cacheadapter[Recommended Settings and Tips: Cache^]

=== Queue

There are several options for queuing, most prominently Redis and https://github.com/google/leveldb[LevelDB^].

Default:: https://products.vshn.ch/appcat/redis.html[Redis by VSHN^]
Offered Choices:: Redis, `level`

Ref: https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/config-cheat-sheet/#queue-queue-and-queue[Configuration Cheat Sheet: Queue^]

== Backup and Restore

We use https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/command-line/#dump[`forgejo dump`] as a https://docs.k8up.io/k8up/2.11/how-tos/application-aware-backups.html[backup command^] for K8up.
This command includes dumps of everything.

The backup scheduled is configured to run daily in the early morning.

Restoring is currently a manual process, there is no `forgejo restore` command available.

Ref: https://docs.gitea.com/administration/backup-and-restore[Backup and Restore^] (Forgejo is based on Gitea and the Forgejo docs do not have a specific page, the page in the Gitea documentation also applies to Forgejo.)

== Metrics and Monitoring

We enable the `/metrics` endpoint and scrape metrics accordingly.
See xref:attachment$example-forgejo-metrics.txt[example-forgejo-metrics.txt] for a list of available metrics.

By using the provided https://codeberg.org/forgejo/forgejo/src/branch/forgejo/contrib/gitea-monitoring-mixin[Monitoring Mixin^] we get Grafana dashboards.

Alerting is done on the availability of the service.

For Codey, we monitor `gitea_users` and compare the number to the chosen plan.
Should the number of users exceed the plan, an alert is raised so that we can contact the customer.

== E-Mail

Forgejo needs to send E-Mails and optionally can also receive E-Mails for issue handling.

Sending via SMTP::
Codey uses Mailgun to send E-Mails with noreply@codey.ch as sender address.
Forgejo by VSHN exposes the configuration parameters to configure the SMTP service.

Receiving via IMAP::
E-Mail receiving works by regularly getting E-Mails from an IMAP mailbox.
This is a manual configuration and only supported in Forgejo by VSHN version.

Refs:

* https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/email-setup/[Email setup^]
* https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/incoming-email/[Incoming Email^]

== Kubernetes Resource Configuration

We set appropriate Kubernetes resources, depending on the service type.

=== Forgejo by VSHN

TODO

=== Codey

[cols=",,,",options="header"]
|===
|Plan
|Requests
|Limits
|Storage

|Mini
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|10 GiB

|Small
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|50 GiB

|Medium
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|200 GiB

|Large
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|Memory: XX, CPU: XX
|500 GiB

|===

== Links

* https://code.forgejo.org/forgejo-helm/forgejo-helm[Official Helm Chart^]
* https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/[Forgejo Documentation^]
* https://code.forgejo.org/infrastructure/k8s-cluster[Forgejo project infrastructure^]

== Default Configurations

=== Forgejo by VSHN Helm Values

WARNING: WIP. Currently Redis connections don't work yet, because `failed: remote error: tls: certificate required`.

[source,yaml]
----
include::attachment$example-forgejo-helm-values.yaml[]
----

Download: xref:attachment$example-forgejo-helm-values.yaml[example-forgejo-helm-values.yaml]

=== Codey Composite Resource Template

WARNING: WIP. Needs proper definition...

.Composite Resource
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
kind: XVSHNForgejo
metadata:
  name: my-codey-prod
spec:
  parameters:
    service:
      majorVersion: "9"
      fqdn: poc.mydomain.com
      adminEmail: admin@example.com
      forgejoSettings:
        config:
          APP_NAME: "Codey"
          mailer:
            ENABLED: "true"
            PROTOCOL: smtps
            SMTP_ADDR: mail.example.com
            SMTP_PORT: "465"
            USER: forgejo
        additionalConfigFromEnvs:
        - name: FORGEJO__MAILER__PASSWD
          valueFrom:
            secretKeyRef:
              name: my-passwords
              key: MAILER_PASSWD
    backup: 
      schedule: "30 23 * * *"
      retention: 12
    extraSecrets:
    - name: my-passwords
----

Old Helm Values: xref:attachment$example-forgejo-helm-values-codey.yaml[example-forgejo-helm-values-codey.yaml]
