docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanations/decisions/postgres-upgrades.adoc, before:

= VSHN Managed PostgreSQL

== Problem

We need to specify how VSHN handles the major and minor upgrades of PostgreSQL by VSHN.

So we need to decide two things:

* How upgrades are handled
* How we communicate with the customer about it

== Requirements

* How do we upgrade?
* When do we upgrade?
* How should customers be informed?
* When should customers be informed?

== Proposals

=== Upgrades

Proposal 1::
Automatic Minor and major upgrades

Proposal 2::
Automatic minor upgrade and manual major upgrades

Proposal 3::
Manual minor and major upgrades

=== Communication

Proposal 4::
Inform 3 months before EOL and then stop the instance

Proposal 5::
Inform 3 months before EOL and then keep the instances but unsupported

Proposal 6::
Inform 3 months before EOL and then delete the instance with enabled deletion protection

== Decision

=== Upgrades

Proposal 2 and proposal 6

== Rationale

=== Upgrades

For minor upgrades the PostgreSQL docs say this:

[quote, https://www.postgresql.org/support/versioning/]
For minor releases, the community considers not upgrading to be riskier than upgrading.

The general consent and best practices here is, that we upgrade to the latest available minor version as soon as possible.

However, major version upgrades often bring changes to internal structures and need migrations steps.
PostgreSQL doesn't maintain backwards compatibility, so there's no way of going back, if an upgrade brings breaking changes.
They can also contain new features and breaking changes that could have unintended side effects.
Thus, it's risky to automatically upgrade to the latest major versions.


=== Communication

Our upstream in this case isn't PostgreSQL directly, but rather StackGres, who don't have regular releases.
So we can't predict when a new version is released with new provided PostgreSQL versions and EOLs.
This means once a new StackGgres version is released that will EOL an existing PostgreSQL version, we'll have to postpone the rollout for 3 months.

Keeping unsupported instances around may give us issues with StackGres.
So we should remove them as soon as possible, so we're not blocked for upgrades.

Commit message:

Add input from the decision discussion

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanations/decisions/postgres-upgrades.adoc, after:

= VSHN Managed PostgreSQL

== Problem

We need to specify how VSHN handles the major and minor upgrades of PostgreSQL by VSHN.
This decision is not about upgrading StackGres, wwhile related to this topic, it doesn't have any customer impact.

So we need to decide two things:

* How upgrades are handled
* How we communicate with the customer about it

== Requirements

* Specification how we do upgrades
* Specification when we do upgrades
* Specification how customers should be informed
* Specification when customers should be informed

== Proposals

=== Upgrades

Proposal 1::
Automatic Minor and major upgrades

Proposal 2::
Automatic minor upgrade and manual major upgrades

Proposal 3::
Manual minor and major upgrades

=== Communication

Proposal 4::
Inform 3 months after EOL and then stop the instance

Proposal 5::
Inform 3 months after EOL and then keep the instances but unsupported

Proposal 6::
Inform 3 months after EOL and then delete the instance with enabled deletion protection

Proposal 7::
Inform 3 months after EOL and then force upgrade the instance

== Decision

=== Upgrades

Proposal 2 and proposal 7

New minor updates will be tested on lab before we put them live.
Each StackGres version https://stackgres.io/doc/latest/intro/versions/[supports] specific major and minor versions of PostgreSQL, so it will need to be updated as well.
After testing and updating StackGres, the new minor version will be rolled out in the next specified maintenance window for each cluster.

Force major upgrades won't be to the most current release, but to the oldest still supported version.
For example 12.x will be upgraded to 13.x even if 15.x is already available.

For the EOL information we take what PostgreSQL themselves say: https://www.postgresql.org/support/versioning/.
StackGres will probably adhere to these policies as well.

== Rationale

=== Upgrades

For minor upgrades the PostgreSQL docs say this:

[quote, https://www.postgresql.org/support/versioning/]
For minor releases, the community considers not upgrading to be riskier than upgrading.

The general consent and best practices here is, that we upgrade to the latest available minor version as soon as possible.

However, major version upgrades often bring changes to internal structures and need migrations steps.
PostgreSQL doesn't maintain backwards compatibility, so there's no way of going back, if an upgrade brings breaking changes.
They can also contain new features and breaking changes that could have unintended side effects.
Thus, it's risky to automatically upgrade to the latest major versions.


=== Communication

Keeping unsupported instances around may give us issues with StackGres.
So we should upgrade them as soon as possible, so we're not blocked for StackGres upgrades.
