README.adoc, before:

= VSHN Application Catalog

This is an https://antora.org/[Antora] documentation website, available at https://application-catalog.docs.vshn.ch.

== Basic Antora Setup

* The documentation pages are stored in the `docs/modules/ROOT/pages` folder.
* Images are stored in the `docs/modules/ROOT/assets/images` folder.
* E-book specific files are located in the `docs/ebook` folder, including the https://www.gimp.org/[Gimp] template of the cover.

== Different Kinds of Antora Websites

There are two possible Antora projects:

* Those including both a `playbook.yml` and `docs/antora.yml` files; and
* Those only including one of them and not the other.

The file `docs/antora.yml` defines a documentation component including several modules. It specifies the name and entry point of a component.

On the other hand, the file `playbook.yml` is used to coalesce various documentation components into one website. It specifies the build order and the style to apply to the final website.

If your project only requires to be documented, but does _not_ take the responsibility for the build process of the documentation, you can remove the `.gitlab-ci.yml`, `Makefile`, and `playbook.yml` files.

On the other hand, projects in charge of documentation building do not always include documentation themselves; in those cases the `docs` folder can be safely deleted, only leaving the `playbook.yml` file.

== Usage

. `make preview` to launch a "live preview" version of the documentation.
. `make html` to create the Antora website in the `_public` subfolder.
. `make pdf epub kindle manpage` to create the corresponding e-books in the `_public` subfolder.
. `make clean` to remove all build products.

== Docker

You can create a Docker image out of this project:

[source,bash]
----
$ docker build -t application-catalog -f deployment/main/Dockerfile .
$ docker run --rm --detach --publish 8080:8080 application-catalog
----

The project includes sample YAML files for a suitable Kubernetes deployment.

== GitLab

This project includes a ready-to-use `.gitlab-ci.yml` file for GitLab integration.

Commit message:

streamline plumbing and README with other docs

README.adoc, after:

= VSHN Application Catalog Documentation

This repository contains all the content of the VSHN Application Catalog documentation hosted at https://kb.vshn.ch/app-catalog/.

The content is written in https://asciidoctor.org/docs/what-is-asciidoc/[AsciiDoc] and rendered using https://docs.antora.org/[Antora].

[TIP]
====
* Writing AsciiDoc is best done using Visual Studio Code with https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=asciidoctor.asciidoctor-vscode[the AsciiDoc addon].
* For a reference what you can do with AsciiDoc, have a look at https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-writers-guide/[AsciiDoc Writer’s Guide].
* Antora is capable of doing many great things with documentation. See https://docs.antora.org/[the Antora docs] to gain insights into the tooling.
====

== Documentation structure

The documentation structure is inspired by the https://documentation.divio.com/[Divio's documentation structure]:

Tutorials (Learning-oriented):: A lesson which teaches you something.
Location: `docs/modules/ROOT/pages/tutorials`.

How-to guides (Problem-oriented):: Step-by-step guides to achieve a goal. Location: `docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos`.

Technical reference (Information-oriented):: Description about the inner ongoings. Location: `docs/modules/ROOT/pages/tutorials`.

Explanation (Understanding-oriented):: Explains the background. Location: `docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanations`.

== Contributing

Create a new branch to make the changes. After you're satisfied with the changes open a Pull Request against the `master` branch.

=== Previewing Changes

To preview your changes locally, make sure you have Docker or Podman installed.

Just type `make preview` and open your browser at http://localhost:2020. This even provides support for live reload when working on the content. See https://github.com/vshn/antora-preview#livereload[this documentation] for more information about it.

=== Adding a New Page

. Create new AsciiDoc (`.adoc`) file in the best matching folder according to the described structure under `docs/modules/ROOT/pages/`.
. Add the file to the navigation under `docs/modules/ROOT/partials/`

For removing pages just do the opposite: Remove the file and remove the entry in the navigation.

== Deployment

This repository only holds https://docs.antora.org/antora/2.3/standard-directories/[Antora content], no plumbing and tooling (aka the Antora https://docs.antora.org/antora/2.3/run-antora/[`playbook.yml`] and `Dockerfile`) to build and deploy it.
All pushes to the `master` branch trigger a GitHub action (`.github/worflows/triggerci.yml`) which in turn triggers the https://git.vshn.net/vshn/docs/kb/-/blob/master/.gitlab-ci.yml[GitLab CI job] to build and deploy the content using Antora.
