docs/modules/ROOT/pages/adr/0035-ikube-2-0-migration-appcat.adoc, before:

= ADR 0035 - iKube 2.0 Migration AppCat
:adr_author:    Simon Beck
:adr_owner:     Schedar
:adr_reviewers:
:adr_date:      2025-07-02
:adr_upd_date:  2025-07-02
:adr_status:    draft
:adr_tags:      appcat, spks

include::partial$adr-meta.adoc[]

[NOTE]
.Summary
====
This ADR compares various strategies how we want to handle the migration to iKube 2.0.
The opportunity is used to address a few pain points we have with the current setup.
This ADR is NOT about iKube 2.0, only about the Crossplane part of SPKS.
====

== Context
SPKS will migrate to a new platform called iKube 2.0.
This is a good time to homogenize AppCat with the SPKS offering where it makes sense.

Currently SPKS is completely separate from AppCat and based on PnT compositions.
SPKS' requirements are a lot more static than AppCat's:

* There's no configuration of the services possible.
* User management is solved via separate compositions.
* The system pre-dates comp-functions by quite a bit. Everything is done via PnT, jsonnet and permutations. Different configurations are selected via `compositionRefs`

Additionally SPKS runs on their own vanilla Kubernetes within their own network.
We only have limitted access to the infastructure.

The users provision the services via a custom GUI which talks to a custom service broker implementation.

The biggest pain points with the current system are:

* Deployment of new versions. It's cumbersome and a manual, thus prone to errors
* A large portion of the composition configuration is hard-coded as yaml for the component. Making it hard do changes

=== Considered Options

Option 1: Port everything as is::

We simply take what we already have and adjust it to the iKube 2.0.
No other changes are made to the system.

* Pros:
  ** Least effort
  ** Provision and deprovisioning is very stable and reliable
  ** Complexity relatively low. Everything is just PnT and jsonnet.
* Cons:
  ** We keep our current pain points
  ** Porting back learnings from AppCat or vice-versa more complicated due to different stacks (PnT vs comp-functions)

Option 2: Port everything to AppCat::

All logic for SPKS will be ported to AppCat.
We get rid of all the PnT and consequently most of the jsonnet generators for the compositions.

* Pros:
  ** Only a single implementation to manage
  ** Getting rid of the hard-coded yaml for the jsonnet generators
  ** Leverage AppCat's automations for deployments
* Cons:
  ** Very high effort to port everything
  ** The slow maintenance cycle for SPKS can lead to very huge change sets when SPKS gets updated
  ** There are already a lot specific implementations baked into AppCat. APPUiO Managed, APPUiO Cloud, converged mode, split mode, plain Kubernetes. Adding another specific implementation will only increase the complexity.

Option 3: Modernize selectively::

We specifically address the greatest pain points we have with the current implementation and modernize those:

* Automate rollouts of new version
  ** Decrease the ammount of manual steps for rolling out changes
  ** Use composition revisions and other learnings from AppCat and port them to SPKS
* Get rid of hardcoded yaml configuration
  ** Move the hard-coded yaml compositions into the component
  ** Leverage jsonnet instead to dynamically generate the compositions, reducing the amount of hardcoded yaml

* Pros:
  ** Pain points get addressed
* Cons:
  ** The management of SPKS is still separate and porting AppCat learnings will require separate implemenations

== Decision

**Option 3.**

This option is the most sensible mix of effort and value.
While SPKS will still be something separate from AppCat, we'll add learnings and automations concerning deployment to the system.

Reducing the amount of hardcoded yaml configuration also makes the whole system a lot more maintainable than the current implementation.

== Consequences

* Large parts of the SPKS component need to be re-written
* We completely change how we deploy SPKS changes and add a lot more automation

Commit message:

Add decision into the summary

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/adr/0035-ikube-2-0-migration-appcat.adoc, after:

= ADR 0035 - iKube 2.0 Migration AppCat
:adr_author:    Simon Beck
:adr_owner:     Schedar
:adr_reviewers:
:adr_date:      2025-07-02
:adr_upd_date:  2025-07-02
:adr_status:    draft
:adr_tags:      appcat, spks

include::partial$adr-meta.adoc[]

[NOTE]
.Summary
====
SPKS gets a new platform called iKube 2.0.
We will use this opportunity to address the biggest pain points we have with the current setup.
We will not completely switch over to an AppCat based solution, but rather take the learnings from there and put them into the SPKS solution.
This ADR is NOT about iKube 2.0, only about the Crossplane part of SPKS.
====

== Context
SPKS will migrate to a new platform called iKube 2.0.
This is a good time to homogenize AppCat with the SPKS offering where it makes sense.

Currently SPKS is completely separate from AppCat and based on PnT compositions.
SPKS' requirements are a lot more static than AppCat's:

* There's no configuration of the services possible.
* User management is solved via separate compositions.
* The system pre-dates comp-functions by quite a bit. Everything is done via PnT, jsonnet and permutations. Different configurations are selected via `compositionRefs`

Additionally SPKS runs on their own vanilla Kubernetes within their own network.
We only have limitted access to the infastructure.

The users provision the services via a custom GUI which talks to a custom service broker implementation.

The biggest pain points with the current system are:

* Deployment of new versions. It's cumbersome and a manual, thus prone to errors
* A large portion of the composition configuration is hard-coded as yaml for the component. Making it hard do changes

=== Considered Options

Option 1: Port everything as is::

We simply take what we already have and adjust it to the iKube 2.0.
No other changes are made to the system.

* Pros:
  ** Least effort
  ** Provision and deprovisioning is very stable and reliable
  ** Complexity relatively low. Everything is just PnT and jsonnet.
* Cons:
  ** We keep our current pain points
  ** Porting back learnings from AppCat or vice-versa more complicated due to different stacks (PnT vs comp-functions)

Option 2: Port everything to AppCat::

All logic for SPKS will be ported to AppCat.
We get rid of all the PnT and consequently most of the jsonnet generators for the compositions.

* Pros:
  ** Only a single implementation to manage
  ** Getting rid of the hard-coded yaml for the jsonnet generators
  ** Leverage AppCat's automations for deployments
* Cons:
  ** Very high effort to port everything
  ** The slow maintenance cycle for SPKS can lead to very huge change sets when SPKS gets updated
  ** There are already a lot specific implementations baked into AppCat. APPUiO Managed, APPUiO Cloud, converged mode, split mode, plain Kubernetes. Adding another specific implementation will only increase the complexity.

Option 3: Modernize selectively::

We specifically address the greatest pain points we have with the current implementation and modernize those:

* Automate rollouts of new version
  ** Decrease the ammount of manual steps for rolling out changes
  ** Use composition revisions and other learnings from AppCat and port them to SPKS
* Get rid of hardcoded yaml configuration
  ** Move the hard-coded yaml compositions into the component
  ** Leverage jsonnet instead to dynamically generate the compositions, reducing the amount of hardcoded yaml

* Pros:
  ** Pain points get addressed
* Cons:
  ** The management of SPKS is still separate and porting AppCat learnings will require separate implemenations

== Decision

**Option 3.**

This option is the most sensible mix of effort and value.
While SPKS will still be something separate from AppCat, we'll add learnings and automations concerning deployment to the system.

Reducing the amount of hardcoded yaml configuration also makes the whole system a lot more maintainable than the current implementation.

== Consequences

* Large parts of the SPKS component need to be re-written
* We completely change how we deploy SPKS changes and add a lot more automation
