docs/modules/ROOT/pages/adr/0049-managed-openbao.adoc, before:

= ADR 0043 - Managed OpenBao Service Implementation
:adr_author:    Yannik Dällenbach
:adr_owner:     Schedar/bespinian
:adr_reviewers: Schedar
:adr_date:      2025-01-13
:adr_upd_date:  2025-01-13
:adr_status:    draft
:adr_tags:      service,openbao,secret-management

include::partial$adr-meta.adoc[]

[NOTE]
.Summary
====
This ADR outlines the implementation of a managed OpenBao service on the AppCat platform to provide secret management capabilities to customers.
This builds upon the suggestion of xref:adr/0024-product-choice-for-secret-management.adoc[] to use OpenBao as secret and PKI management solution.
====

== Context

Following the suggestion in xref:adr/0024-product-choice-for-secret-management.adoc[] to use OpenBao for secret management, we need to implement it as a managed service within the AppCat ecosystem. OpenBao provides:

- Secret storage with REST API
- Vault API compatibility
- Open-source license with Linux Foundation backing
- Self-hostable deployment model

The service must integrate with the existing AppCat patterns including:

- Crossplane-based provisioning
- Managed namespace deployment model
- User-workload monitoring integration
- Backup and maintenance automation
- SLA monitoring and reporting

== Requirements

=== Functional Requirements

* **Secret Management**: Store, retrieve, and manage secrets via REST API
* **API Compatibility**: Maintain Vault API compatibility for existing tooling
* **High Availability**: Support clustered deployment for production workloads
* **Authentication**: Integration with OIDC

=== Operational Requirements

* **Backup & Recovery**: Automated backup of secret data
* **Monitoring**: SLA metrics, capacity alerts, and operational dashboards
* **Maintenance**: Automated security updates and version upgrades
* **Scaling**: Horizontal scaling capabilities for high-throughput scenarios
* **Security**: Encryption at rest, TLS in transit, audit logging

== Proposals

=== Proposal 1: Helm Chart with External Storage

Deploy OpenBao using the official Helm chart with external storage backends (PostgreSQL).

Implementation::

- Use `provider-helm` to deploy OpenBao Helm chart
- PostgreSQL backend for secret storage (leveraging existing `VSHNPostgreSQL`)
- Initialization through composition functions

Advantages::

- Leverages existing PostgreSQL infrastructure
- Official Helm chart provides production-ready deployment
- Separation of compute and storage for better scaling
- Familiar AppCat deployment patterns

Disadvantages::

- Additional complexity in managing external dependencies
- Potential performance overhead with external storage

=== Proposal 2: Integrated Deployment with Local Storage

Deploy OpenBao with integrated storage using Raft consensus.

Implementation::

- Use `provider-helm` to deploy OpenBao Helm chart
- Raft storage backend for simplicity
- Built-in clustering for high availability

Advantages::

- Simplified deployment with fewer external dependencies
- Built-in consensus and replication

Disadvantages::

- Raft cluster management overhead

=== Proposal 3: Operator-Based Deployment

Develop or adopt an OpenBao operator for Kubernetes-native management.

Implementation::

- Custom operator following AppCat patterns
- CRDs for vault configuration and policies
- Automated lifecycle management
- Native Kubernetes integration

Advantages::

- Full Kubernetes-native experience
- Automated day-2 operations
- Extensible for future features

Disadvantages::

- High development effort
- Additional operational complexity
- Maintenance burden for custom operator

== Decision

**Proposal 2: Helm Chart with Internal Storage**

We choose to implement OpenBao using the official Helm chart with integrated Raft storage.

### Implementation Details

Storage Backend::

- Primary: Raft consensus storage for built-in clustering
- Leverage existing AppCat Backup mechanisms (K8up)
- Self-contained storage eliminates external dependencies

**API Specification:**

The VSHNOpenBao CRD follows AppCat conventions (xref:adr/0016-service-api-design.adoc[]) with parameter groups for service configuration, sizing, backup, monitoring, and maintenance.

```yaml
apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
kind: VSHNOpenBao
metadata:
  name: my-openbao
  namespace: my-namespace
spec:
  parameters:
    # Service configuration
    service:
      version: "2.1.0"  # OpenBao version (enum of supported versions)
      fqdn: "openbao.example.com"  # Fully qualified domain name
      serviceLevel: guaranteed  # besteffort or guaranteed
      openBaoSettings:
        # Auto-unseal configuration (optional)
        # Enables automatic unsealing using external key management systems
        # Only one provider should be configured at a time
        autoUnseal:
          awsKmsSecretRef: ""  # Reference to secret containing AWS KMS credentials and configuration
          azureKeyVaultSecretRef: ""  # Reference to secret containing Azure Key Vault credentials and configuration
          gcpKmsSecretRef: ""  # Reference to secret containing GCP Cloud KMS credentials and configuration
          transitSecretRef: ""  # Reference to secret containing connection details to another Vault/OpenBao instance

    # Number of OpenBao instances
    # For guaranteed serviceLevel: must be 3
    # For besteffort serviceLevel: can be 1 or 3
    instances: 3

    # Sizing
    size:
      plan: standard  # Resource plan: small, standard, large
      requests:
        cpu: "2"
        memory: "4Gi"
      disk: 20Gi  # Raft storage volume size per replica
      storageClass: ""  # Optional storage class override

    # Backup and restore configuration (using K8up)
    backup:
      enabled: true
      schedule: "0 2 * * *"  # Cron schedule for Raft snapshots
      retention:
        keepLast: 2
        keepHourly: 2
        keepDaily: 7
        keepWeekly: 4
        keepMonthly: 3
    restore:
      claimName: ""
      backupName: ""

    # Maintenance window
    maintenance:
      dayOfWeek: Tuesday  # enum: Monday-Sunday
      timeOfDay: "22:00"  # HH:MM format in UTC

    # Monitoring
    monitoring:
      alertmanagerConfigRef: ""
      alertmanagerConfigSecretRef: {}
      alertmanagerConfigTemplate: {}
      email: ""

  # Unseal keys and root token secret reference
  # This secret will contain the unseal keys and root token generated during initialization
  writeConnectionSecretToRef:
    name: openbao-unseal-keys
```

**Unseal Keys Secret:**

The `writeConnectionSecretToRef` secret contains the unseal keys and root token:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: openbao-unseal-keys
data:
  UNSEAL_KEY_1: <base64-encoded-key>
  UNSEAL_KEY_2: <base64-encoded-key>
  UNSEAL_KEY_3: <base64-encoded-key>
  UNSEAL_KEY_4: <base64-encoded-key>
  UNSEAL_KEY_5: <base64-encoded-key>
  ROOT_TOKEN: <base64-encoded-root-token>
```

**Auto unseal**

Auto unseal allows OpenBao to unseal automatically without manual intervention using an external key management system. This is crucial for automated recovery and reduces operational burden.

Supported auto-unseal providers:

AWS KMS::: Configure using `awsKmsSecretRef` pointing to a secret containing AWS credentials and KMS key configuration
Azure Key Vault::: Configure using `azureKeyVaultSecretRef` pointing to a secret containing Azure credentials and Key Vault details
GCP Cloud KMS::: Configure using `gcpKmsSecretRef` pointing to a secret containing GCP credentials and Cloud KMS configuration
Transit (Vault/OpenBao)::: Configure using `transitSecretRef` pointing to a secret containing connection details to another Vault/OpenBao instance

Each secret reference should contain the necessary credentials and configuration for the respective provider. When auto-unseal is configured, OpenBao will automatically unseal after restarts without requiring the unseal keys from `writeUnsealKeysSecretToRef`.

If no auto-unseal provider is configured, manual unsealing using the unseal keys is required after each pod restart.

Example AWS KMS auto-unseal secret:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: openbao-awskms-config
type: Opaque
stringData:
  region: "us-east-1"
  access_key: "AKIAIOSFODNN7EXAMPLE"
  secret_key: "wJalrXUtnFEMI/K7MDENG/bPxRfiCYEXAMPLEKEY"
  kms_key_id: "19ec80b0-dfdd-4d97-8164-c6examplekey"
  endpoint: "https://vpce-0e1bb1852241f8cc6-pzi0do8n.kms.us-east-1.vpce.amazonaws.com"
```

**Service Levels:**

besteffort::
- 1 or 3 instances
- Standard resource guarantees
- Best-effort availability

guaranteed::
- Requires 3 instances (HA deployment)
- Resource guarantees with pod anti-affinity
- Higher availability SLA

TODO: Work on plan specifications

Key Components::

1. **OpenBao Cluster**: 3-node HA deployment with Raft consensus
2. **Raft Storage**: Built-in distributed storage backend
3. **Backup Storage**: `ObjectBucket` for Raft snapshots using K8up
4. **Monitoring**: Custom SLI exporter and Prometheus integration

Security Model::

- TLS encryption for all communications
- RBAC policies managed through OpenBao
- Audit logging to persistent storage
- Auto-unseal configuration for OpenBao bootstrap

== Consequences

Positive::

- Simplified deployment with fewer external dependencies
- Built-in consensus and replication reduces operational complexity
- Self-contained backup mechanisms using Raft snapshots
- Leverages official OpenBao Helm chart for production readiness
- Eliminates external storage dependency management

Negative::

- Raft cluster management requires specialized knowledge
- Limited to OpenBao's built-in storage capabilities
- Potential storage scaling limitations compared to external databases
- No feature parity with HashiCorp Vault Enterprise

Operational Impact::

- Simplified service deployment with reduced external dependencies
- Raft snapshot management and restoration procedures
- Need for OpenBao and Raft consensus expertise in operations team
- Integration testing with existing AppCat services
- TLS certificate lifecycle management (renewal, rotation)
- Auto-unseal configuration and cluster bootstrap management
- Raft cluster health monitoring and node management
- Audit log management and compliance reporting
- ServiceMonitor configuration for Prometheus integration
- Snapshot-based backup validation and testing

Customer Benefits::

- Self-hosted alternative to cloud secret management services
- Vault API compatibility for existing applications and tooling
- Compliance with data sovereignty requirements

Commit message:

Update Proposal 2 title to specify Helm chart deployment

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/adr/0049-managed-openbao.adoc, after:

= ADR 0043 - Managed OpenBao Service Implementation
:adr_author:    Yannik Dällenbach
:adr_owner:     Schedar/bespinian
:adr_reviewers: Schedar
:adr_date:      2025-01-13
:adr_upd_date:  2025-01-13
:adr_status:    draft
:adr_tags:      service,openbao,secret-management

include::partial$adr-meta.adoc[]

[NOTE]
.Summary
====
This ADR outlines the implementation of a managed OpenBao service on the AppCat platform to provide secret management capabilities to customers.
This builds upon the suggestion of xref:adr/0024-product-choice-for-secret-management.adoc[] to use OpenBao as secret and PKI management solution.
====

== Context

Following the suggestion in xref:adr/0024-product-choice-for-secret-management.adoc[] to use OpenBao for secret management, we need to implement it as a managed service within the AppCat ecosystem. OpenBao provides:

- Secret storage with REST API
- Vault API compatibility
- Open-source license with Linux Foundation backing
- Self-hostable deployment model

The service must integrate with the existing AppCat patterns including:

- Crossplane-based provisioning
- Managed namespace deployment model
- User-workload monitoring integration
- Backup and maintenance automation
- SLA monitoring and reporting

== Requirements

=== Functional Requirements

* **Secret Management**: Store, retrieve, and manage secrets via REST API
* **API Compatibility**: Maintain Vault API compatibility for existing tooling
* **High Availability**: Support clustered deployment for production workloads
* **Authentication**: Integration with OIDC

=== Operational Requirements

* **Backup & Recovery**: Automated backup of secret data
* **Monitoring**: SLA metrics, capacity alerts, and operational dashboards
* **Maintenance**: Automated security updates and version upgrades
* **Scaling**: Horizontal scaling capabilities for high-throughput scenarios
* **Security**: Encryption at rest, TLS in transit, audit logging

== Proposals

=== Proposal 1: Helm Chart with External Storage

Deploy OpenBao using the official Helm chart with external storage backends (PostgreSQL).

Implementation::

- Use `provider-helm` to deploy OpenBao Helm chart
- PostgreSQL backend for secret storage (leveraging existing `VSHNPostgreSQL`)
- Initialization through composition functions

Advantages::

- Leverages existing PostgreSQL infrastructure
- Official Helm chart provides production-ready deployment
- Separation of compute and storage for better scaling
- Familiar AppCat deployment patterns

Disadvantages::

- Additional complexity in managing external dependencies
- Potential performance overhead with external storage

=== Proposal 2: Helm Chart with Internal Storage

Deploy OpenBao using the official Helm chart with integrated storage using Raft consensus.

Implementation::

- Use `provider-helm` to deploy OpenBao Helm chart
- Raft storage backend for simplicity
- Built-in clustering for high availability

Advantages::

- Simplified deployment with fewer external dependencies
- Built-in consensus and replication

Disadvantages::

- Raft cluster management overhead

=== Proposal 3: Operator-Based Deployment

Develop or adopt an OpenBao operator for Kubernetes-native management.

Implementation::

- Custom operator following AppCat patterns
- CRDs for vault configuration and policies
- Automated lifecycle management
- Native Kubernetes integration

Advantages::

- Full Kubernetes-native experience
- Automated day-2 operations
- Extensible for future features

Disadvantages::

- High development effort
- Additional operational complexity
- Maintenance burden for custom operator

== Decision

**Proposal 2: Helm Chart with Internal Storage**

We choose to implement OpenBao using the official Helm chart with integrated Raft storage.

### Implementation Details

Storage Backend::

- Primary: Raft consensus storage for built-in clustering
- Leverage existing AppCat Backup mechanisms (K8up)
- Self-contained storage eliminates external dependencies

**API Specification:**

The VSHNOpenBao CRD follows AppCat conventions (xref:adr/0016-service-api-design.adoc[]) with parameter groups for service configuration, sizing, backup, monitoring, and maintenance.

```yaml
apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
kind: VSHNOpenBao
metadata:
  name: my-openbao
  namespace: my-namespace
spec:
  parameters:
    # Service configuration
    service:
      version: "2.1.0"  # OpenBao version (enum of supported versions)
      fqdn: "openbao.example.com"  # Fully qualified domain name
      serviceLevel: guaranteed  # besteffort or guaranteed
      openBaoSettings:
        # Auto-unseal configuration (optional)
        # Enables automatic unsealing using external key management systems
        # Only one provider should be configured at a time
        autoUnseal:
          awsKmsSecretRef: ""  # Reference to secret containing AWS KMS credentials and configuration
          azureKeyVaultSecretRef: ""  # Reference to secret containing Azure Key Vault credentials and configuration
          gcpKmsSecretRef: ""  # Reference to secret containing GCP Cloud KMS credentials and configuration
          transitSecretRef: ""  # Reference to secret containing connection details to another Vault/OpenBao instance

    # Number of OpenBao instances
    # For guaranteed serviceLevel: must be 3
    # For besteffort serviceLevel: can be 1 or 3
    instances: 3

    # Sizing
    size:
      plan: standard  # Resource plan: small, standard, large
      requests:
        cpu: "2"
        memory: "4Gi"
      disk: 20Gi  # Raft storage volume size per replica
      storageClass: ""  # Optional storage class override

    # Backup and restore configuration (using K8up)
    backup:
      enabled: true
      schedule: "0 2 * * *"  # Cron schedule for Raft snapshots
      retention:
        keepLast: 2
        keepHourly: 2
        keepDaily: 7
        keepWeekly: 4
        keepMonthly: 3
    restore:
      claimName: ""
      backupName: ""

    # Maintenance window
    maintenance:
      dayOfWeek: Tuesday  # enum: Monday-Sunday
      timeOfDay: "22:00"  # HH:MM format in UTC

    # Monitoring
    monitoring:
      alertmanagerConfigRef: ""
      alertmanagerConfigSecretRef: {}
      alertmanagerConfigTemplate: {}
      email: ""

  # Unseal keys and root token secret reference
  # This secret will contain the unseal keys and root token generated during initialization
  writeConnectionSecretToRef:
    name: openbao-unseal-keys
```

**Unseal Keys Secret:**

The `writeConnectionSecretToRef` secret contains the unseal keys and root token:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: openbao-unseal-keys
data:
  UNSEAL_KEY_1: <base64-encoded-key>
  UNSEAL_KEY_2: <base64-encoded-key>
  UNSEAL_KEY_3: <base64-encoded-key>
  UNSEAL_KEY_4: <base64-encoded-key>
  UNSEAL_KEY_5: <base64-encoded-key>
  ROOT_TOKEN: <base64-encoded-root-token>
```

**Auto unseal**

Auto unseal allows OpenBao to unseal automatically without manual intervention using an external key management system. This is crucial for automated recovery and reduces operational burden.

Supported auto-unseal providers:

AWS KMS::: Configure using `awsKmsSecretRef` pointing to a secret containing AWS credentials and KMS key configuration
Azure Key Vault::: Configure using `azureKeyVaultSecretRef` pointing to a secret containing Azure credentials and Key Vault details
GCP Cloud KMS::: Configure using `gcpKmsSecretRef` pointing to a secret containing GCP credentials and Cloud KMS configuration
Transit (Vault/OpenBao)::: Configure using `transitSecretRef` pointing to a secret containing connection details to another Vault/OpenBao instance

Each secret reference should contain the necessary credentials and configuration for the respective provider. When auto-unseal is configured, OpenBao will automatically unseal after restarts without requiring the unseal keys from `writeUnsealKeysSecretToRef`.

If no auto-unseal provider is configured, manual unsealing using the unseal keys is required after each pod restart.

Example AWS KMS auto-unseal secret:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: openbao-awskms-config
type: Opaque
stringData:
  region: "us-east-1"
  access_key: "AKIAIOSFODNN7EXAMPLE"
  secret_key: "wJalrXUtnFEMI/K7MDENG/bPxRfiCYEXAMPLEKEY"
  kms_key_id: "19ec80b0-dfdd-4d97-8164-c6examplekey"
  endpoint: "https://vpce-0e1bb1852241f8cc6-pzi0do8n.kms.us-east-1.vpce.amazonaws.com"
```

**Service Levels:**

besteffort::
- 1 or 3 instances
- Standard resource guarantees
- Best-effort availability

guaranteed::
- Requires 3 instances (HA deployment)
- Resource guarantees with pod anti-affinity
- Higher availability SLA

TODO: Work on plan specifications

Key Components::

1. **OpenBao Cluster**: 3-node HA deployment with Raft consensus
2. **Raft Storage**: Built-in distributed storage backend
3. **Backup Storage**: `ObjectBucket` for Raft snapshots using K8up
4. **Monitoring**: Custom SLI exporter and Prometheus integration

Security Model::

- TLS encryption for all communications
- RBAC policies managed through OpenBao
- Audit logging to persistent storage
- Auto-unseal configuration for OpenBao bootstrap

== Consequences

Positive::

- Simplified deployment with fewer external dependencies
- Built-in consensus and replication reduces operational complexity
- Self-contained backup mechanisms using Raft snapshots
- Leverages official OpenBao Helm chart for production readiness
- Eliminates external storage dependency management

Negative::

- Raft cluster management requires specialized knowledge
- Limited to OpenBao's built-in storage capabilities
- Potential storage scaling limitations compared to external databases
- No feature parity with HashiCorp Vault Enterprise

Operational Impact::

- Simplified service deployment with reduced external dependencies
- Raft snapshot management and restoration procedures
- Need for OpenBao and Raft consensus expertise in operations team
- Integration testing with existing AppCat services
- TLS certificate lifecycle management (renewal, rotation)
- Auto-unseal configuration and cluster bootstrap management
- Raft cluster health monitoring and node management
- Audit log management and compliance reporting
- ServiceMonitor configuration for Prometheus integration
- Snapshot-based backup validation and testing

Customer Benefits::

- Self-hosted alternative to cloud secret management services
- Vault API compatibility for existing applications and tooling
- Compliance with data sovereignty requirements
