docs/modules/ROOT/pages/adr/index.adoc, before:

= ADR Index
:navtitle: ADRs

[cols="3,1,1,1"]
|===
|Title |Status |Date |Updated

|xref:adr/0001-architecture-decision-records.adoc[]

`processes`
|draft |2025-01-01 |2025-01-06
|xref:adr/0002-service-documentation.adoc[]

`processes`
|draft |2025-01-06 |2025-01-06
|xref:adr/0003-stackgres-operator-for-postgresql.adoc[]

`postgresql,service`
|implemented |2022-11-15 |2023-11-01
|xref:adr/0004-postgresql-metrics-exporter.adoc[]

`postgresql,service,monitoring,metrics`
|implemented |2023-02-21 |2023-03-07
|xref:adr/0005-automated-postgresql-service-upgrades.adoc[]

`postgresql,service,maintenance`
|implemented |2023-05-23 |2023-05-04
|xref:adr/0006-bitnami-helm-chart-for-redis.adoc[]

`redis,service`
|implemented |2022-12-27 |2023-01-04
|xref:adr/0007-automated-redis-service-upgrades.adoc[]

`redis,upgrades,maintenance`
|implemented |2023-07-11 |2023-07-11
|xref:adr/0008-bitnami-helm-chart-for-mariadb.adoc[]

`service,mariadb,helm`
|implemented |2022-12-27 |2023-10-31
|xref:adr/0009-proxysql-for-mariadb-clustering.adoc[]

`mariadb,ha,cluster`
|implemented |2024-10-17 |2024-10-17
|xref:adr/0010-minio-for-local-object-storage.adoc[]

`minio,service,objectstorage`
|implemented |2023-10-23 |2023-10-23
|xref:adr/0011-monitor-object-bucket-with-probe.adoc[]

`minio,monitoring,sli`
|implemented |2023-10-23 |2023-10-23
|xref:adr/0012-converged-service-in-managed-namespace.adoc[]

`framework,service`
|implemented |2022-03-24 |2022-12-05
|xref:adr/0013-use-logging-facilities-of-platform.adoc[]

`framework,service,logging`
|implemented |2023-03-14 |2023-03-14
|xref:adr/0014-commodore-component-to-deploy-compositions-and-xrds.adoc[]

`framework,commodore,crossplane`
|implemented |2022-08-05 |2022-12-09
|xref:adr/0015-metrics-and-monitoring-of-services.adoc[]

`framework,monitoring,metrics`
|implemented |2023-07-06 |2023-09-26
|xref:adr/0016-service-api-design.adoc[]

`framework,api,service`
|draft |2022-08-23 |2022-12-05
|xref:adr/0017-handling-of-capacity-alerts-for-incident-prevention.adoc[]

`framework,service,alerting`
|implemented |2023-02-24 |2023-03-02
|xref:adr/0018-sla-reports-handling.adoc[]

`framework,sla,reports`
|implemented |2023-05-08 |2023-05-09
|xref:adr/0019-deletion-protection-with-validating-webhook.adoc[]

`framework,service`
|implemented |2024-03-14 |2024-03-18
|xref:adr/0020-user-management-in-service-instances.adoc[]

`framework,service`
|implemented |2024--05-16 |2024--05-17
|xref:adr/0021-composition-function-error-handling.adoc[]

`framework,crossplane`
|implemented |2024-06-10 |2024-06-14
|xref:adr/0022-replace-api-server-by-custom-resources.adoc[]

`framework,apiserver`
|accepted |2023-11-02 |2023-11-02
|xref:adr/0023-releasee-process-for-appcat-components.adoc[]

`framework,process,cicd`
|implemented |2024-07-25 |2024-07-25
|xref:adr/0024-product-choice-for-secret-management.adoc[]

`service,product`
|draft |2024-05-27 |2024-05-27
|xref:adr/0025-nextcloud-deployment-with-helm-chart.adoc[]

`service,nextcloud,helm`
|implemented |2024-06-12 |2024-07-02
|xref:adr/0026-mongodb-product.adoc[]

`service,mongodb,product`
|draft |2024-08-06 |2024-09-05
|xref:adr/0027-keycloak-deployment-with-helm-chart.adoc[]

`service,keycloak,helm`
|implemented |2023-10-19 |2023-10-19
|xref:adr/0028-sli-prober-for-object-storage.adoc[]

`service,monitoring,sli`
|implemented |2023-10-23 |2023-10-23
|xref:adr/0029-converged-service-provisioning-implementation.adoc[]

`framework`
|obsolete |2022-03-24 |2022-11-25
|xref:adr/0030-function-revisions.adoc[]

`comp-functions,crossplane`
|draft | |2025-01-29
|xref:adr/0031-naming-scheme-for-servala-cluster-names-and-urls.adoc[]

`servala,naming,scheme,cluster`
|accepted | |2025-04-11
|xref:adr/0032-ci-pipeline.adoc[]

`ci,pipeline,cd,github`
|draft | |2025-05-22
|xref:adr/0033-event-based-billing-oddo.adoc[]

`billing,odoo`
|draft | |2025-06-02
|xref:adr/0034-vshnredis-high-availability.adoc[]

`redis,ha`
|draft | |2025-06-04
|xref:adr/0035-ikube-2-0-migration-appcat.adoc[]

`appcat, spks`
|draft | |2025-07-02
|xref:adr/0036-revisiting-postgresql-operators.adoc[]

`appcat,postgresql`
|draft | |2025-07-07
|xref:adr/0037-mariadb-bitnami-replacement.adoc[]

`mariadb,bitnami,helm,service`
|draft | |2025-07-30
|xref:adr/0038-appcat-redis-alternative.adoc[]

`redis,bitnami,helm,service,operator`
|draft | |2025-09-03
|xref:adr/0039-servala-framework-requirements.adoc[]

`framework`
|accepted |2025-09-30 |2025-10-17
|xref:adr/0040-tcp-service-access.adoc[]

`framework, networking, tcp`
|accepted |2025-10-01 |2025-10-27
|xref:adr/0041-migrate-minio-to-rclone.adoc[]

`minio,rclone,objectstorage`
|rejected |2025-12-29 |2026-01-06
|xref:adr/0042-backup-encryption-for-mariadb-galera-and-postgresql.adoc[]

`backup,encryption,galera,postgresql`
|draft |2025-10-06 |2025-10-06
|xref:adr/0043-wazuh-agent-for-appcat-services.adoc[]

`siem,xdr,security`
|draft | |2026-01-08
|xref:adr/0044-configuration-language-kcl-vs-cue.adoc[]

`framework,framework2,kcl,cue,configuration`
|draft |:adr_upd_date: |
|xref:adr/0045-service-orchestration-crossplane-2-0.adoc[]

`framework,framework2,crossplane,composition,orchestration`
|draft |:adr_upd_date: |
|xref:adr/0046-secret-management-framework-2-0.adoc[]

`framework,framework2,secrets,crossplane,vault,openbao`
|draft |:adr_upd_date: |
|xref:adr/0047-service-maintenance-and-upgrades-framework-2-0.adoc[]

`framework,framework2,maintenance,upgrades,crossplane,workflows,cronoperations`
|draft |:adr_upd_date: |
|xref:adr/0048-evaluating-vector-databases-as-appcat-services.adoc[]

`database,service`
|draft | |2026-01-14
|===

Commit message:

Add evaluation of minio alternatives

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/adr/index.adoc, after:

= ADR Index
:navtitle: ADRs

[cols="3,1,1,1"]
|===
|Title |Status |Date |Updated

|xref:adr/0001-architecture-decision-records.adoc[]

`processes`
|draft |2025-01-01 |2025-01-06
|xref:adr/0002-service-documentation.adoc[]

`processes`
|draft |2025-01-06 |2025-01-06
|xref:adr/0003-stackgres-operator-for-postgresql.adoc[]

`postgresql,service`
|implemented |2022-11-15 |2023-11-01
|xref:adr/0004-postgresql-metrics-exporter.adoc[]

`postgresql,service,monitoring,metrics`
|implemented |2023-02-21 |2023-03-07
|xref:adr/0005-automated-postgresql-service-upgrades.adoc[]

`postgresql,service,maintenance`
|implemented |2023-05-23 |2023-05-04
|xref:adr/0006-bitnami-helm-chart-for-redis.adoc[]

`redis,service`
|implemented |2022-12-27 |2023-01-04
|xref:adr/0007-automated-redis-service-upgrades.adoc[]

`redis,upgrades,maintenance`
|implemented |2023-07-11 |2023-07-11
|xref:adr/0008-bitnami-helm-chart-for-mariadb.adoc[]

`service,mariadb,helm`
|implemented |2022-12-27 |2023-10-31
|xref:adr/0009-proxysql-for-mariadb-clustering.adoc[]

`mariadb,ha,cluster`
|implemented |2024-10-17 |2024-10-17
|xref:adr/0010-minio-for-local-object-storage.adoc[]

`minio,service,objectstorage`
|implemented |2023-10-23 |2023-10-23
|xref:adr/0011-monitor-object-bucket-with-probe.adoc[]

`minio,monitoring,sli`
|implemented |2023-10-23 |2023-10-23
|xref:adr/0012-converged-service-in-managed-namespace.adoc[]

`framework,service`
|implemented |2022-03-24 |2022-12-05
|xref:adr/0013-use-logging-facilities-of-platform.adoc[]

`framework,service,logging`
|implemented |2023-03-14 |2023-03-14
|xref:adr/0014-commodore-component-to-deploy-compositions-and-xrds.adoc[]

`framework,commodore,crossplane`
|implemented |2022-08-05 |2022-12-09
|xref:adr/0015-metrics-and-monitoring-of-services.adoc[]

`framework,monitoring,metrics`
|implemented |2023-07-06 |2023-09-26
|xref:adr/0016-service-api-design.adoc[]

`framework,api,service`
|draft |2022-08-23 |2022-12-05
|xref:adr/0017-handling-of-capacity-alerts-for-incident-prevention.adoc[]

`framework,service,alerting`
|implemented |2023-02-24 |2023-03-02
|xref:adr/0018-sla-reports-handling.adoc[]

`framework,sla,reports`
|implemented |2023-05-08 |2023-05-09
|xref:adr/0019-deletion-protection-with-validating-webhook.adoc[]

`framework,service`
|implemented |2024-03-14 |2024-03-18
|xref:adr/0020-user-management-in-service-instances.adoc[]

`framework,service`
|implemented |2024--05-16 |2024--05-17
|xref:adr/0021-composition-function-error-handling.adoc[]

`framework,crossplane`
|implemented |2024-06-10 |2024-06-14
|xref:adr/0022-replace-api-server-by-custom-resources.adoc[]

`framework,apiserver`
|accepted |2023-11-02 |2023-11-02
|xref:adr/0023-releasee-process-for-appcat-components.adoc[]

`framework,process,cicd`
|implemented |2024-07-25 |2024-07-25
|xref:adr/0024-product-choice-for-secret-management.adoc[]

`service,product`
|draft |2024-05-27 |2024-05-27
|xref:adr/0025-nextcloud-deployment-with-helm-chart.adoc[]

`service,nextcloud,helm`
|implemented |2024-06-12 |2024-07-02
|xref:adr/0026-mongodb-product.adoc[]

`service,mongodb,product`
|draft |2024-08-06 |2024-09-05
|xref:adr/0027-keycloak-deployment-with-helm-chart.adoc[]

`service,keycloak,helm`
|implemented |2023-10-19 |2023-10-19
|xref:adr/0028-sli-prober-for-object-storage.adoc[]

`service,monitoring,sli`
|implemented |2023-10-23 |2023-10-23
|xref:adr/0029-converged-service-provisioning-implementation.adoc[]

`framework`
|obsolete |2022-03-24 |2022-11-25
|xref:adr/0030-function-revisions.adoc[]

`comp-functions,crossplane`
|draft | |2025-01-29
|xref:adr/0031-naming-scheme-for-servala-cluster-names-and-urls.adoc[]

`servala,naming,scheme,cluster`
|accepted | |2025-04-11
|xref:adr/0032-ci-pipeline.adoc[]

`ci,pipeline,cd,github`
|draft | |2025-05-22
|xref:adr/0033-event-based-billing-oddo.adoc[]

`billing,odoo`
|draft | |2025-06-02
|xref:adr/0034-vshnredis-high-availability.adoc[]

`redis,ha`
|draft | |2025-06-04
|xref:adr/0035-ikube-2-0-migration-appcat.adoc[]

`appcat, spks`
|draft | |2025-07-02
|xref:adr/0036-revisiting-postgresql-operators.adoc[]

`appcat,postgresql`
|draft | |2025-07-07
|xref:adr/0037-mariadb-bitnami-replacement.adoc[]

`mariadb,bitnami,helm,service`
|draft | |2025-07-30
|xref:adr/0038-appcat-redis-alternative.adoc[]

`redis,bitnami,helm,service,operator`
|draft | |2025-09-03
|xref:adr/0039-servala-framework-requirements.adoc[]

`framework`
|accepted |2025-09-30 |2025-10-17
|xref:adr/0040-tcp-service-access.adoc[]

`framework, networking, tcp`
|accepted |2025-10-01 |2025-10-27
|xref:adr/0041-migrate-minio-to-rclone.adoc[]

`minio,rclone,objectstorage`
|rejected |2025-12-29 |2026-01-06
|xref:adr/0042-backup-encryption-for-mariadb-galera-and-postgresql.adoc[]

`backup,encryption,galera,postgresql`
|draft |2025-10-06 |2025-10-06
|xref:adr/0043-wazuh-agent-for-appcat-services.adoc[]

`siem,xdr,security`
|draft | |2026-01-08
|xref:adr/0044-configuration-language-kcl-vs-cue.adoc[]

`framework,framework2,kcl,cue,configuration`
|draft |:adr_upd_date: |
|xref:adr/0045-service-orchestration-crossplane-2-0.adoc[]

`framework,framework2,crossplane,composition,orchestration`
|draft |:adr_upd_date: |
|xref:adr/0046-secret-management-framework-2-0.adoc[]

`framework,framework2,secrets,crossplane,vault,openbao`
|draft |:adr_upd_date: |
|xref:adr/0047-service-maintenance-and-upgrades-framework-2-0.adoc[]

`framework,framework2,maintenance,upgrades,crossplane,workflows,cronoperations`
|draft |:adr_upd_date: |
|xref:adr/0048-evaluating-vector-databases-as-appcat-services.adoc[]

`database,service`
|draft | |2026-01-14
|xref:adr/0050-alternatives-to-minio-for-s3-compatible-object-storage.adoc[]

`s3,object-storage`
|draft | |2026-01-26
|===
