docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/mariadbgalera/bootstrap_node.adoc, before:

= How to Bootstrap a Cluster (other than from Node 0)

[WARNING]
====
If you bootstrap from any other node than the one that has proceeded the furthest in transactions, this will result in data loss.
====

To restart a Galera Cluster, you might need to bootstrap the cluster from another node than 0 (after a ungraceful shutdown).
You can basically follow the steps described in the Helm Chart: https://github.com/bitnami/charts/tree/master/bitnami/mariadb-galera/#bootstraping-a-node-other-than-0[Bootstraping a node other than 0].

In order to change Helm Values, you first need to find the Helm release object:

.Get the compositemariadbinstances
[source,shell]
----
kubectl describe compositemariadbinstances.syn.tools f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf
----

This gives you all resources in this composite:

[source,yaml]
----
[...]
spec:
  compositionRef:
    name: d8ba1fe4-2b19-11eb-adc1-0242ac120002
  resourceRefs:
  - apiVersion: helm.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
    kind: Release
    name: f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf-wlt5g
    uid: 7093f2e0-f16f-481c-9ccf-9c03e65f7d67
  - apiVersion: helm.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
    kind: Release
    name: f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf-4xp5n
    uid: 19b4bf1d-88d0-4085-a9ea-e3062f082f63
  - apiVersion: v1
    kind: Secret
    name: f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf
    uid: a0dab152-9e72-4bde-a913-e0acd8addd2c
  - apiVersion: mysql.sql.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
    kind: ProviderConfig
    name: f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf
    uid: b825adcc-b671-4963-a049-cfea30fcfda2
[...]
----

The second (Helm) `Release` should be the MariaDB Helm release, in this example it's `f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf-4xp5n`.

.Verify if it's the release of the mariadb-galera cluster
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get releases.helm.crossplane.io f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf-4xp5n

NAME                                         CHART            VERSION   SYNCED   READY   STATE      REVISION   DESCRIPTION        AGE
f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf-4xp5n   mariadb-galera   5.2.1     True     True    deployed   19         Upgrade complete   14d
----

To change values for the safe bootstraping just edit this release and set the values based on your findings (node number to bootstrap from and the `podManagementPolicy`.
As you can't change a `StatefulSet` first delete the mariadb `StatefulSet` and then apply your changes to the release object (this will recreate the `StatefulSet` again).

When your cluster is up and running again (all 3 pods ready), first scale down to 1 replica and wait until only one Pod remains and then scale down to 0 replicas.
This makes sure that you can bootstrap from the first node again:

[source,shell]
----
# Scale to 1 replica
kubectl scale sts mariadb --replicas=1

# Wait
# Scale to 0 replica
kubectl scale sts mariadb --replicas=0
----

Delete the `StatefulSet` again and then reverse your changes in the helm release.
Now the Galera Service should start again without errors.

Commit message:

Add note about backup before bootstrapping

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/mariadbgalera/bootstrap_node.adoc, after:

= How to Bootstrap a Cluster (other than from Node 0)

[WARNING]
====
If you bootstrap from any other node than the one that has proceeded the furthest in transactions, this will result in data loss.
Always take a backup of the data directory before taking any further steps.
====

To restart a Galera Cluster, you might need to bootstrap the cluster from another node than 0 (after a ungraceful shutdown).
You can basically follow the steps described in the Helm Chart: https://github.com/bitnami/charts/tree/master/bitnami/mariadb-galera/#bootstraping-a-node-other-than-0[Bootstraping a node other than 0].

In order to change Helm Values, you first need to find the Helm release object:

.Get the compositemariadbinstances
[source,shell]
----
kubectl describe compositemariadbinstances.syn.tools f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf
----

This gives you all resources in this composite:

[source,yaml]
----
[...]
spec:
  compositionRef:
    name: d8ba1fe4-2b19-11eb-adc1-0242ac120002
  resourceRefs:
  - apiVersion: helm.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
    kind: Release
    name: f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf-wlt5g
    uid: 7093f2e0-f16f-481c-9ccf-9c03e65f7d67
  - apiVersion: helm.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
    kind: Release
    name: f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf-4xp5n
    uid: 19b4bf1d-88d0-4085-a9ea-e3062f082f63
  - apiVersion: v1
    kind: Secret
    name: f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf
    uid: a0dab152-9e72-4bde-a913-e0acd8addd2c
  - apiVersion: mysql.sql.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
    kind: ProviderConfig
    name: f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf
    uid: b825adcc-b671-4963-a049-cfea30fcfda2
[...]
----

The second (Helm) `Release` should be the MariaDB Helm release, in this example it's `f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf-4xp5n`.

.Verify if it's the release of the mariadb-galera cluster
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get releases.helm.crossplane.io f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf-4xp5n

NAME                                         CHART            VERSION   SYNCED   READY   STATE      REVISION   DESCRIPTION        AGE
f1600418-cf59-4ec0-b4d9-d0270559dbcf-4xp5n   mariadb-galera   5.2.1     True     True    deployed   19         Upgrade complete   14d
----

To change values for the safe bootstraping just edit this release and set the values based on your findings (node number to bootstrap from and the `podManagementPolicy`.
As you can't change a `StatefulSet` first delete the mariadb `StatefulSet` and then apply your changes to the release object (this will recreate the `StatefulSet` again).

When your cluster is up and running again (all 3 pods ready), first scale down to 1 replica and wait until only one Pod remains and then scale down to 0 replicas.
This makes sure that you can bootstrap from the first node again:

[source,shell]
----
# Scale to 1 replica
kubectl scale sts mariadb --replicas=1

# Wait
# Scale to 0 replica
kubectl scale sts mariadb --replicas=0
----

Delete the `StatefulSet` again and then reverse your changes in the helm release.
Now the Galera Service should start again without errors.
