docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/connect_service_catalog_to_service_broker.adoc, before:

= Connect the _Service Catalog_ to a _Service Broker_

This how-to will explain how a _Service Catalog_ is connected to the _Crossplane Service Broker_.

== Preparations

- Have access to an authentication server from which you can xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/bearer_token_authentication.adoc[request _Bearer Tokens_].
- xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/setup_crossplane_service_broker.adoc[Have a _Crossplane Service Broker_ in your cluster that's configured for HTTP _Bearer Token_ authentication.]
- xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/setup_service_catalog.adoc[Have a _Service Catalog_ running on your cluster.]
- https://svc-cat.io/docs/install/#installing-the-service-catalog-cli[Have `svcat` installed on your computer.]

== Configuring HTTP _Bearer Token_ Authentication
// tag::main[]

For the following instructions, change to the `catalog` namespace of your cluster:

```bash
kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=catalog
```

In order to connect the _Service Catalog_ to the _Crossplane Service Broker_, we'll have to provide the _Service Catalog_ with some credentials.
These credentials are used by the _Service Catalog_ to identify itself to the _Crossplane Service Broker_.
In this how-to, we focus on _Bearer Token_ authentication.
The advantage of the _Bearer Token_ authentication is that the _Crossplane Service Broker_ can restrict the offered services based on information provided in the _Bearer Token_.

[TIP]
=====
If you don't need to use _Bearer Token_ authentication, you may want to fall back to _Basic_ authentication.
This would typically be the case when your _Crossplane Service Broker_ is only serving one team, group or customer anyways, or in other words:
It's a single tenant system instance.

The xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/basic_authentication.adoc[Setup HTTP _Basic_ authentication] how-to covers that.
=====

The _Service Catalog_ will read the _Bearer Token_ from a Kubernetes secret resource.
Therefore we need to get the _Bearer Token_ from the authentication server and create a Kubernetes secret with it:

```bash
TOKEN=$(kubectl run \
  --namespace default \
  --attach --rm --quiet \
  "curl-$(date +%s)" \
  --image=docker.io/curlimages/curl -- \
  --silent --request POST \
  --data "grant_type=client_credentials" \
  --data "client_id=950aaaa5-a656-4a8c-8515-aa505a550a52" \
  --data "client_secret=5a2924a5-050a-445a-aa5a-0a50a445a845" \
  "https://auth.corp.internal/token" | jq -r .access_token)
printf "----BEGIN TOKEN----\n${TOKEN}\n----END TOKEN----\n\n"
kubectl create secret generic bearer-creds "--from-literal=token=${TOKEN}" --dry-run=client -o yaml | kubectl apply -f -
```

NOTE: Don't forget to change the values `client_id`, `client_secret` and the URL in the command above.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The token that's issued by the authentication server may only be valid for a short time.
(The token which was shown before in the xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/bearer_token_authentication.adoc#get_a_bearer_token[HTTP _Bearer Token_ authentication] section was only valid for 600 seconds, that's just 10 minutes.)

In that case you will need to deploy a https://github.com/vshn/kube-token-refresher[kube-token-refresher].
The xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/kube_token_refresher.adoc[Setup Kube Token Refresher] how-to covers the setup.
The token refresher will ensure that the service catalog always has a valid _Bearer Token_.
====

== Register the _Crossplane Service Broker_ at the _Service Catalog_

Now, finally, we must register the _Crossplane Service Broker_ at the  _Service Catalog_.
The _Service Catalog_ will immediately query the _Crossplane Service Broker_ about the services it offers.
It (the _Service Catalog_) will then updates its catalog of all the services that can be provided by our (and all other) registered _Service Brokers_.

To register the _Crossplane Service Broker_ run the following command.

```bash
svcat register servicebroker-test --bearer-secret bearer-creds --url "http://service-broker-test.service-broker"
```

It should then be possible to interact with this instance of the _Crossplane Service Broker_ through the _Service Catalog_:

```bash
# List all registered service brokers and their status
svcat get brokers

# Show the services that are available to order.
svcat marketplace
```
// end::main[]

Commit message:

Clean dead links and tutorials

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/connect_service_catalog_to_service_broker.adoc, after:

= Connect the _Service Catalog_ to a _Service Broker_

WARNING: This tutorial is deprecated. Some links may not work.

This how-to will explain how a _Service Catalog_ is connected to the _Crossplane Service Broker_.

== Preparations

- Have access to an authentication server from which you can xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/bearer_token_authentication.adoc[request _Bearer Tokens_].
- xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/setup_crossplane_service_broker.adoc[Have a _Crossplane Service Broker_ in your cluster that's configured for HTTP _Bearer Token_ authentication.]
- xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/setup_service_catalog.adoc[Have a _Service Catalog_ running on your cluster.]
- https://svc-cat.io/docs/install/#installing-the-service-catalog-cli[Have `svcat` installed on your computer.]

== Configuring HTTP _Bearer Token_ Authentication
// tag::main[]

For the following instructions, change to the `catalog` namespace of your cluster:

```bash
kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=catalog
```

In order to connect the _Service Catalog_ to the _Crossplane Service Broker_, we'll have to provide the _Service Catalog_ with some credentials.
These credentials are used by the _Service Catalog_ to identify itself to the _Crossplane Service Broker_.
In this how-to, we focus on _Bearer Token_ authentication.
The advantage of the _Bearer Token_ authentication is that the _Crossplane Service Broker_ can restrict the offered services based on information provided in the _Bearer Token_.

[TIP]
=====
If you don't need to use _Bearer Token_ authentication, you may want to fall back to _Basic_ authentication.
This would typically be the case when your _Crossplane Service Broker_ is only serving one team, group or customer anyways, or in other words:
It's a single tenant system instance.

The xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/basic_authentication.adoc[Setup HTTP _Basic_ authentication] how-to covers that.
=====

The _Service Catalog_ will read the _Bearer Token_ from a Kubernetes secret resource.
Therefore we need to get the _Bearer Token_ from the authentication server and create a Kubernetes secret with it:

```bash
TOKEN=$(kubectl run \
  --namespace default \
  --attach --rm --quiet \
  "curl-$(date +%s)" \
  --image=docker.io/curlimages/curl -- \
  --silent --request POST \
  --data "grant_type=client_credentials" \
  --data "client_id=950aaaa5-a656-4a8c-8515-aa505a550a52" \
  --data "client_secret=5a2924a5-050a-445a-aa5a-0a50a445a845" \
  "https://auth.corp.internal/token" | jq -r .access_token)
printf "----BEGIN TOKEN----\n${TOKEN}\n----END TOKEN----\n\n"
kubectl create secret generic bearer-creds "--from-literal=token=${TOKEN}" --dry-run=client -o yaml | kubectl apply -f -
```

NOTE: Don't forget to change the values `client_id`, `client_secret` and the URL in the command above.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The token that's issued by the authentication server may only be valid for a short time.
(The token which was shown before in the xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/bearer_token_authentication.adoc#get_a_bearer_token[HTTP _Bearer Token_ authentication] section was only valid for 600 seconds, that's just 10 minutes.)

In that case you will need to deploy a https://github.com/vshn/kube-token-refresher[kube-token-refresher].
The xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/kube_token_refresher.adoc[Setup Kube Token Refresher] how-to covers the setup.
The token refresher will ensure that the service catalog always has a valid _Bearer Token_.
====

== Register the _Crossplane Service Broker_ at the _Service Catalog_

Now, finally, we must register the _Crossplane Service Broker_ at the  _Service Catalog_.
The _Service Catalog_ will immediately query the _Crossplane Service Broker_ about the services it offers.
It (the _Service Catalog_) will then updates its catalog of all the services that can be provided by our (and all other) registered _Service Brokers_.

To register the _Crossplane Service Broker_ run the following command.

```bash
svcat register servicebroker-test --bearer-secret bearer-creds --url "http://service-broker-test.service-broker"
```

It should then be possible to interact with this instance of the _Crossplane Service Broker_ through the _Service Catalog_:

```bash
# List all registered service brokers and their status
svcat get brokers

# Show the services that are available to order.
svcat marketplace
```
// end::main[]
