docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/setup_crossplane_service_broker.adoc, before:

= Install the Crossplane Service Broker

The https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker[_Crossplane Service Broker_] will manage _Crossplane custom resources_ in the same cluster as it runs itself.
It must be provided with a least one _service id_ to handle.

== Preparations

- Have access to a Kubernetes cluster with Crossplane installed.

== Configuration
// tag::main[]

The _Crossplane Service Broker_ is configured through environment variables.
A typical deployment may look like the following YAML.

After you created the file `deployment.yaml` below, run this command to install the _Crossplane Service Broker_ in your Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
```

.deployment.yaml
```yaml
kind: Namespace # <1>
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  labels:
    name: service-broker
  name: service-broker
---
kind: Deployment # <2>
apiVersion: apps/v1
metadata:
  name: service-broker-test # <3>
  namespace: service-broker
  labels:
    name: service-broker-test
spec:
  replicas: 2
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/instance: test
      app.kubernetes.io/name: service-broker
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/instance: test
        app.kubernetes.io/name: service-broker
        name: service-broker-test
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: service-broker
          image: quay.io/vshn/crossplane-service-broker:v0.4.1
          ports:
            - name: http
              containerPort: 8080
              protocol: TCP
          env: # <4>
            - name: OSB_NAMESPACE
              value: crossplane-services
            - name: OSB_USERNAME
              value: test
            - name: OSB_PASSWORD
              value: changeMeEventually
            - name: OSB_SERVICE_IDS
              value: redis-k8s,3a385e26-cdfc-46bc-961b-69892684af8b,16379f5f-0c5f-4c55-a119-fd063af62919
            - # Used for Bearer Token Validation
              name: OSB_JWT_KEYS_JWK_URL
              value: https://auth.corp.internal/jwks
          resources:
            limits:
              cpu: 500m
              memory: 128Mi
            requests:
              cpu: 200m
              memory: 64Mi
          livenessProbe:
            httpGet:
              path: /healthz
              port: http
              scheme: HTTP
          readinessProbe:
            httpGet:
              path: /healthz
              port: http
              scheme: HTTP
          terminationMessagePath: /dev/termination-log
          terminationMessagePolicy: File
          imagePullPolicy: Always
          securityContext:
            runAsNonRoot: true
            readOnlyRootFilesystem: true
      restartPolicy: Always
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 30
      dnsPolicy: ClusterFirst
      serviceAccountName: service-broker
      serviceAccount: service-broker
      schedulerName: default-scheduler
  strategy:
    type: RollingUpdate
    rollingUpdate:
      maxUnavailable: 25%
      maxSurge: 25%
  minReadySeconds: 30
  revisionHistoryLimit: 10
  progressDeadlineSeconds: 600
---
kind: Service # <5>
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: service-broker-test
  namespace: service-broker
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/instance: test
    app.kubernetes.io/name: service-broker
    name: service-broker-test
spec:
  ports:
    - name: http
      protocol: TCP
      port: 80
      targetPort: http
  selector:
    app.kubernetes.io/instance: test
    app.kubernetes.io/name: service-broker
  type: ClusterIP
  sessionAffinity: None
```
<1> This part of the YAML ensures that a Kubernetes namespace called `service-broker` exists.
<2> This part of the YAML initiates the actual Deployment of the service broker.
<3> This line defines the name of your _Crossplane Service Broker_.
    Don't change it for now, as this guide relies on it being called `service-broker-test`.
<4> See below for an explanation of the environment variables that are defined here.
<5> In order for the service catalog to discover and access the _Crossplane Service Broker_, a Kubernetes `Service` is created.
    It conveniently also takes care of the load balancing between the two instances of the _Crossplane Service Broker_ that get deployed.

Take note of the environment variables that are configured in the above `deployment.yaml`:

[cols="3,5,4",options="header"]
|===
| Variable Name
| Description
| Example Value

| `OSB_SERVICE_IDS`
| The _Crossplane Service Broker_ must know which services it's responsible for.
  The ID can be any arbitrary string, though often this is a UUID.
| `redis-k8s,3a385e26-cdfc-46bc-961b-69892684af8b,16379f5f-0c5f-4c55-a119-fd063af62919`

| `OSB_NAMESPACE`
| This is the namespace in which the _Crossplane Service Broker_ will create it the relevant _Crossplane custom resources_.
| `crossplane-services`

| `OSB_USERNAME`
| This is the username which is used when doing Basic auth between the _Service Catalog_ and the _Service Broker_.
  If you don't use basic auth, choose a random string here.
| `test`

| `OSB_PASSWORD`
| This is the password which is used when doing Basic auth between the _Service Catalog_ and the _Service Broker_.
  If you don't use basic auth, choose a random string here.
| `changeMeEventually`

| `OSB_JWT_KEYS_JWK_URL`
| This URL is queried _during the startup_ of the service broker.
  It contains the public keys in https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7517[JWK-format] that should be used to verify the validity of the https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519[JWT tokens].

  Learn more about this in the xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/bearer_token_authentication.adoc[HTTP _Bearer Token_ authentication] how-to.
| `\https://auth.corp.internal/jwks`
|===
// end::main[]

Commit message:

Add documentation plan upgrades
* How to enable them in the service broker
* Concepts on plan upgrades

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/setup_crossplane_service_broker.adoc, after:

= Install the Crossplane Service Broker

The https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker[_Crossplane Service Broker_] will manage _Crossplane custom resources_ in the same cluster as it runs itself.
It must be provided with a least one _service id_ to handle.

== Preparations

- Have access to a Kubernetes cluster with Crossplane installed.

== Configuration
// tag::main[]

The _Crossplane Service Broker_ is configured through environment variables.
A typical deployment may look like the following YAML.

After you created the file `deployment.yaml` below, run this command to install the _Crossplane Service Broker_ in your Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
```

.deployment.yaml
```yaml
kind: Namespace # <1>
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  labels:
    name: service-broker
  name: service-broker
---
kind: Deployment # <2>
apiVersion: apps/v1
metadata:
  name: service-broker-test # <3>
  namespace: service-broker
  labels:
    name: service-broker-test
spec:
  replicas: 2
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/instance: test
      app.kubernetes.io/name: service-broker
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/instance: test
        app.kubernetes.io/name: service-broker
        name: service-broker-test
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: service-broker
          image: quay.io/vshn/crossplane-service-broker:v0.4.1
          ports:
            - name: http
              containerPort: 8080
              protocol: TCP
          env: # <4>
            - name: OSB_NAMESPACE
              value: crossplane-services
            - name: OSB_USERNAME
              value: test
            - name: OSB_PASSWORD
              value: changeMeEventually
            - name: OSB_SERVICE_IDS
              value: redis-k8s,3a385e26-cdfc-46bc-961b-69892684af8b,16379f5f-0c5f-4c55-a119-fd063af62919
            - # Used for Bearer Token Validation
              name: OSB_JWT_KEYS_JWK_URL
              value: https://auth.corp.internal/jwks
            - # Only enable this if plan upgrades are spcifically supported
              name: OSB_ALLOW_PLAN_UPGRADES
              value: "true"
          resources:
            limits:
              cpu: 500m
              memory: 128Mi
            requests:
              cpu: 200m
              memory: 64Mi
          livenessProbe:
            httpGet:
              path: /healthz
              port: http
              scheme: HTTP
          readinessProbe:
            httpGet:
              path: /healthz
              port: http
              scheme: HTTP
          terminationMessagePath: /dev/termination-log
          terminationMessagePolicy: File
          imagePullPolicy: Always
          securityContext:
            runAsNonRoot: true
            readOnlyRootFilesystem: true
      restartPolicy: Always
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 30
      dnsPolicy: ClusterFirst
      serviceAccountName: service-broker
      serviceAccount: service-broker
      schedulerName: default-scheduler
  strategy:
    type: RollingUpdate
    rollingUpdate:
      maxUnavailable: 25%
      maxSurge: 25%
  minReadySeconds: 30
  revisionHistoryLimit: 10
  progressDeadlineSeconds: 600
---
kind: Service # <5>
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: service-broker-test
  namespace: service-broker
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/instance: test
    app.kubernetes.io/name: service-broker
    name: service-broker-test
spec:
  ports:
    - name: http
      protocol: TCP
      port: 80
      targetPort: http
  selector:
    app.kubernetes.io/instance: test
    app.kubernetes.io/name: service-broker
  type: ClusterIP
  sessionAffinity: None
```
<1> This part of the YAML ensures that a Kubernetes namespace called `service-broker` exists.
<2> This part of the YAML initiates the actual Deployment of the service broker.
<3> This line defines the name of your _Crossplane Service Broker_.
    Don't change it for now, as this guide relies on it being called `service-broker-test`.
<4> See below for an explanation of the environment variables that are defined here.
<5> In order for the service catalog to discover and access the _Crossplane Service Broker_, a Kubernetes `Service` is created.
    It conveniently also takes care of the load balancing between the two instances of the _Crossplane Service Broker_ that get deployed.

Take note of the environment variables that are configured in the above `deployment.yaml`:

[cols="3,5,4",options="header"]
|===
| Variable Name
| Description
| Example Value

| `OSB_SERVICE_IDS`
| The _Crossplane Service Broker_ must know which services it's responsible for.
  The ID can be any arbitrary string, though often this is a UUID.
| `redis-k8s,3a385e26-cdfc-46bc-961b-69892684af8b,16379f5f-0c5f-4c55-a119-fd063af62919`

| `OSB_NAMESPACE`
| This is the namespace in which the _Crossplane Service Broker_ will create it the relevant _Crossplane custom resources_.
| `crossplane-services`

| `OSB_USERNAME`
| This is the username which is used when doing Basic auth between the _Service Catalog_ and the _Service Broker_.
  If you don't use basic auth, choose a random string here.
| `test`

| `OSB_PASSWORD`
| This is the password which is used when doing Basic auth between the _Service Catalog_ and the _Service Broker_.
  If you don't use basic auth, choose a random string here.
| `changeMeEventually`

| `OSB_JWT_KEYS_JWK_URL`
| This URL is queried _during the startup_ of the service broker.
  It contains the public keys in https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7517[JWK-format] that should be used to verify the validity of the https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519[JWT tokens].

  Learn more about this in the xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/bearer_token_authentication.adoc[HTTP _Bearer Token_ authentication] how-to.
| `\https://auth.corp.internal/jwks`

| `OSB_ALLOW_PLAN_UPGRADES`
| Whether to allow the Crossplane Service Broker to upgrade plans of service instances.
  The service broker will only allow increasing plan sizes or switching between SLAs.

  +
  This requires explicit plan upgrade support from the Crossplane setup. 
  xref:app-catalog:ROOT:how-tos/crossplane/enable_plan_upgrade.adoc[Enabeling Plan Upgrades] explains this setup in more detail.
  Don't set this environment variable if this setup hasn't been done for all services.
| `true`

|===
// end::main[]
