docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/setup_service_catalog.adoc, before:

= Install a Service Catalog

The https://svc-cat.io[_service catalog_] provides a single, well-defined API to manage services provided by one or many service brokers, such as the _Crossplane Service Broker_.

[NOTE]
=====
Sometimes the term _application catalog_ is used instead of _service catalog_.
They usually mean the same thing.
=====

== Preparations

- Have access to a Kubernetes cluster installed.

== Configuration
// tag::main[]

The command below will install the _service catalog_ service in your current Kubernetes cluster using Helm in the `catalog` namespace.
The namespace will be created if it doesn't already exist.

Before you can run the command below, you need to create a file called `values.yaml` with the following content:

.values.yaml
```yaml
image: quay.io/kubernetes-service-catalog/service-catalog:v0.3.1 <1>
securityContext: { runAsUser: 1001 } <2>
```
<1> The specific Docker image of the service catalog that will be deployed.
<2> Configuring the service catalog such that it doesn't run as root.
    This may not be necessary in your cluster.

== Installation

Run the following command to install the _service catalog_:

```bash
helm install \
  catalog \ <1>
  --values values.yaml \ <2>
  --namespace catalog \ <3>
  --create-namespace \ <4>
  --repo https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-catalog \ <5>
  catalog <6>
```
<1> The name of the service in your Kubernetes cluster.
<2> Read configuration options from `values.yaml` file.
<3> The namespace in which the _service catalog_ will be installed into.
<4> The previously defined namespace will be created if it doesn't yet exist.
<5> The Helm repository that contains the chart for the _service catalog_.
<6> The name of the chart which Helm shall apply.
// end::main[]

Commit message:

Clean dead links and tutorials

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/crossplane_service_broker/setup_service_catalog.adoc, after:

= Install a Service Catalog

WARNING: This tutorial is deprecated. Some links may not work.

The https://svc-cat.io[_service catalog_] provides a single, well-defined API to manage services provided by one or many service brokers, such as the _Crossplane Service Broker_.

[NOTE]
=====
Sometimes the term _application catalog_ is used instead of _service catalog_.
They usually mean the same thing.
=====

== Preparations

- Have access to a Kubernetes cluster installed.

== Configuration
// tag::main[]

The command below will install the _service catalog_ service in your current Kubernetes cluster using Helm in the `catalog` namespace.
The namespace will be created if it doesn't already exist.

Before you can run the command below, you need to create a file called `values.yaml` with the following content:

.values.yaml
```yaml
image: quay.io/kubernetes-service-catalog/service-catalog:v0.3.1 <1>
securityContext: { runAsUser: 1001 } <2>
```
<1> The specific Docker image of the service catalog that will be deployed.
<2> Configuring the service catalog such that it doesn't run as root.
    This may not be necessary in your cluster.

== Installation

Run the following command to install the _service catalog_:

```bash
helm install \
  catalog \ <1>
  --values values.yaml \ <2>
  --namespace catalog \ <3>
  --create-namespace \ <4>
  --repo https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-catalog \ <5>
  catalog <6>
```
<1> The name of the service in your Kubernetes cluster.
<2> Read configuration options from `values.yaml` file.
<3> The namespace in which the _service catalog_ will be installed into.
<4> The previously defined namespace will be created if it doesn't yet exist.
<5> The Helm repository that contains the chart for the _service catalog_.
<6> The name of the chart which Helm shall apply.
// end::main[]
