docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/connect-to-servala-control-cluster.adoc, before:

= Connect to a Servala control cluster

Servala control clusters are vclusters that run within specific service clusters. This means they differ from service cluster such that they are not OpenShift clusters but rather vanilla Kubernetes.

Their authentication is handled via the `kubelogin` plugin. For more details how to install and connect to the vcluster see: https://hub.syn.tools/vcluster/how-tos/oidc.html#_optional_setup_kubelogin[here].

.Example kubeconfig
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
clusters:
- cluster:
    server: https://api.cloudscale-rma-1-prod1.control.servala.com/ <1>
  name: c-sv-ctr-cls-rma-1-prod01 <2>
contexts:
- context:
    cluster: c-sv-ctr-cls-rma-1-prod01 <2>
    namespace: default
    user: oidc-user
  name: c-sv-ctr-cls-rma-1-prod01 <2>
current-context: c-sv-ctr-cls-rma-1-prod01 <2>
kind: Config
preferences: {}
users:
- name: oidc-user
  user:
    exec:
      apiVersion: client.authentication.k8s.io/v1beta1
      args:
      - oidc-login
      - get-token
      - --oidc-issuer-url=https://id.vshn.net/auth/realms/vshn-realm
      - --oidc-client-id=appuio-managed_c-sv-ctr-cls-rma-1-prod01 <3>
      - --oidc-extra-scope=email offline_access profile openid
      command: kubectl
      env: null
      interactiveMode: IfAvailable
      provideClusterInfo: false
----

<1> URL to connect to
<2> Cluster name for easier identification
<3> `appuio-managed_` + cluster name

Save the kubeconfig at a convenient location and use it to connect to the control-plane cluster.

Commit message:

Add note about the kubeconfig repo

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/connect-to-servala-control-cluster.adoc, after:

= Connect to a Servala control cluster

== Use the servala-kubeconfigs repository

Clone https://github.com/vshn/servala-kubeconfigs locally and simply `cd` into the folder that corresponds with the control plane you want to connect to.
`direnv` will handle the rest.

== Craft a new kubeconfig

Servala control clusters are vclusters that run within specific service clusters. This means they differ from service cluster such that they are not OpenShift clusters but rather vanilla Kubernetes.

Their authentication is handled via the `kubelogin` plugin. For more details how to install and connect to the vcluster see: https://hub.syn.tools/vcluster/how-tos/oidc.html#_optional_setup_kubelogin[here].

.Example kubeconfig
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
clusters:
- cluster:
    server: https://api.cloudscale-rma-1-prod1.control.servala.com/ <1>
  name: c-sv-ctr-cls-rma-1-prod01 <2>
contexts:
- context:
    cluster: c-sv-ctr-cls-rma-1-prod01 <2>
    namespace: default
    user: oidc-user
  name: c-sv-ctr-cls-rma-1-prod01 <2>
current-context: c-sv-ctr-cls-rma-1-prod01 <2>
kind: Config
preferences: {}
users:
- name: oidc-user
  user:
    exec:
      apiVersion: client.authentication.k8s.io/v1beta1
      args:
      - oidc-login
      - get-token
      - --oidc-issuer-url=https://id.vshn.net/auth/realms/vshn-realm
      - --oidc-client-id=appuio-managed_c-sv-ctr-cls-rma-1-prod01 <3>
      - --oidc-extra-scope=email offline_access profile openid
      command: kubectl
      env: null
      interactiveMode: IfAvailable
      provideClusterInfo: false
----

<1> URL to connect to
<2> Cluster name for easier identification
<3> `appuio-managed_` + cluster name

Save the kubeconfig at a convenient location and use it to connect to the control-plane cluster.
