docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/implement_new_service_offering.adoc, before:

= How to Implement a new Service Offering

This page describes the steps which are necessary to implement a new service offering based on Crossplane and the https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker[crossplane-service-broker].

We use the fictional `Foo` service in the following examples and a fictional Helm chart `foo-chart`.


== Create Crossplane Resources

The main work to implement a new service offering is creating the required Crossplane resources.
This includes a _CompositeResourceDefinition_ (XRD) and one _Composition_ per offered plan.

See the xref:explanations/crossplane_service_broker.adoc[Crossplane Service Broker explanation] on how these resources map to the open service broker concepts.

See the https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.1/concepts/composition.html[Crossplane documentation] on more general information regarding Crossplane and its different resources.

=== CompositeResourceDefinition (XRD)
The XRD resource defines a new service offering.
You can use a name of your choosing, the Crossplane best practice defines a naming scheme of `Composite<NAME>Instance`.

==== Metadata
Make sure the following labels are set (see xref:explanations/crossplane_service_broker.adoc#metadata[metadata]):

* `service.syn.tools/id`: Generate a new UUID
* `service.syn.tools/name`: Name of the new service offering

To add further metadata you can use the following annotations:

* `service.syn.tools/description`: Description for the new service offering
* `service.syn.tools/metadata`: JSON object with further https://github.com/openservicebrokerapi/servicebroker/blob/master/spec.md#service-offering-object[metadata]

==== Connection Details
Define which information an application needs in order to be able to connect and use this service offering by using the `.spec.connectionSecretKeys` list.
Usually this includes an endpoint (IP address or hostname), a port as well as credentials (username/password).

==== Printer Columns
Defining https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#additional-printer-columns[printer columns] can help in troubleshooting by showing relevant information.
Configure printer columns for the `Plan` and `Cluster`.

==== Example
[source,yaml]
----
kind: CompositeResourceDefinition
metadata:
  name: compositefooinstances.syn.tools
  labels:
    service.syn.tools/id: 6ca63cdb-0cfa-4c5e-b080-72f22ff5f3e6 # uuidgen | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]'
    service.syn.tools/name: foo-k8s
    service.syn.tools/updatable: 'true'
  annotations:
    service.syn.tools/description: Foo high performance database for big data machine learning.
    service.syn.tools/metadata: |
      {
        "displayName": "Foo DB on K8s",
        "version": "1.3.37"
      }
    service.syn.tools/tags: |
      ["foo", "ml", "bigdata", "bar"]
spec:
  connectionSecretKeys:
    - endpoint
    - port
    - username
    - password
  group: syn.tools
  names:
    kind: CompositeFooInstance
    plural: compositefooinstances
  versions:
    - name: v1
      referenceable: true
      served: true
      additionalPrinterColumns:
        - jsonPath: .metadata.labels['service\.syn\.tools/plan']
          name: Plan
          type: string
        - jsonPath: .metadata.labels['service\.syn\.tools/cluster']
          name: Cluster
          type: string
----

=== Compositions
The Compositions define the "building blocks" how the service offering is being provisioned.
See the https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.1/concepts/composition.html[Crossplane documentation] for further information how they work and play together with XRDs and XRs.

Each offered plan of a service is defined in a Composition.

==== Metadata
The name of a composition must be its UUID.
Make sure the following labels are set (see xref:explanations/crossplane_service_broker.adoc#metadata[metadata]):

* `service.syn.tools/plan`: Name of the plan
* `service.syn.tools/cluster`: Name of the cluster this plan should be provisioned
* `service.syn.tools/id`: UUID of the service this plan belongs to
* `service.syn.tools/name`: Name of the service this plan belongs to
* `service.syn.tools/updatable`: If the service instances can be updated

To add further metadata you can use the following annotations:

* `service.syn.tools/description`: Description for this plan
* `service.syn.tools/metadata`: JSON object with further https://github.com/openservicebrokerapi/servicebroker/blob/master/spec.md#service-plan-object[metadata]

==== Resources
A Composition defines a list of K8s resources which should be created for each instance of this plan.
These resources together build the provisioned instance and usually consist of `Release` resources which the https://github.com/crossplane-contrib/provider-helm[provider-helm] then installs accordingly.

Patches can be used to further parametrize the resources and use information on the XR as input for further templating.

==== Example
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1
kind: Composition
metadata:
  name: 43905323-ed5f-466a-9d7f-ddc16cb74864 # uuidgen | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]'
  labels:
    service.syn.tools/cluster: prod-cluster-01
    service.syn.tools/id: 6ca63cdb-0cfa-4c5e-b080-72f22ff5f3e6
    service.syn.tools/name: foo-k8s
    service.syn.tools/plan: small
    service.syn.tools/updatable: "true"
  annotations:
    service.syn.tools/description: Foo instance small size
    service.syn.tools/metadata: |
      {
        "displayName": "Small",
        "memory": "1Gi",
        "storageCapacity": "8Gi"
      }
spec:
  compositeTypeRef:
    apiVersion: syn.tools/v1
    kind: CompositeFooInstance
  writeConnectionSecretsToNamespace: crossplane-system # Namespace to collect all connection secrets
  resources:
    - connectionDetails:
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: endpoint
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: port
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: username
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: password
      base:
        apiVersion: helm.crossplane.io/v1beta1
        kind: Release
        spec:
          # Read back information from provisioned K8s resources in the target namespace
          connectionDetails:
            - apiVersion: v1
              kind: Service
              name: foo-master
              fieldPath: status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip
              toConnectionSecretKey: endpoint
            - apiVersion: v1
              kind: Service
              name: foo-master
              fieldPath: spec.ports[0].port
              toConnectionSecretKey: port
            - apiVersion: v1
              kind: Secret
              name: foo-admin
              fieldPath: data.username
              toConnectionSecretKey: username
            - apiVersion: v1
              kind: Secret
              name: foo-admin
              fieldPath: data.password
              toConnectionSecretKey: password
          writeConnectionSecretToRef:
            namespace: crossplane-system
          forProvider:
            chart:
              name: foo-chart
              repository: https://charts.example.com
              version: 1.3.37
            values:
              fullnameOverride: foo
              service:
                type: LoadBalancer
              resources:
                requests:
                  cpu: 1000m
                  memory: 1Gi
                limits:
                  cpu: 2000m
                  memory: 1Gi
          rollbackLimit: 3
      patches:
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.annotations
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.forProvider.namespace
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[service.syn.tools/cluster]
          toFieldPath: spec.providerConfigRef.name
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.writeConnectionSecretToRef.name
          transforms:
            - string:
                fmt: "%s-foo"
              type: string
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.connectionDetails[0].namespace
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.connectionDetails[1].namespace
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.connectionDetails[2].namespace
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.connectionDetails[3].namespace
----

=== Commodore Component

To simplify the creation of these Crossplane resources the https://git.vshn.net/swisscompks/component-spks-crossplane[spks-crossplane component] exists.
It will generate the required resources based on the configured input in the configuration hierarchy.

Especially to define multiple plans this approach helps to keep the config more DRY and maintainable.

==== Example
This example setup will generate the same Crossplane resoruces as showcased in the previous examples.
[source,yaml]
----
parameters:
  spks_crossplane:
    serviceDefinitions:
      foo-k8s:
        uuid: 6ca63cdb-0cfa-4c5e-b080-72f22ff5f3e6
        description: Foo high performance database for big data machine learning.
        metadata:
          displayName: Foo DB on K8s
          version: 1.3.37
        tags:
          - foo
          - ml
          - bigdata
          - bar
        updatable: "true"
        xrd: CompositeFooInstance
        connectionSecretKeys:
          - endpoint
          - port
          - username
          - password
        versions:
          - name: v1
            served: true
            referenceable: true
            additionalPrinterColumns:
              - jsonPath: .metadata.labels['service\.syn\.tools/plan']
                name: Plan
                type: string
              - jsonPath: .metadata.labels['service\.syn\.tools/cluster']
                name: Cluster
                type: string
        baseComposition:
          writeConnectionSecretsToNamespace: crossplane-system
          resources:
            01_foo-helm-chart:
              connectionDetails:
                - fromConnectionSecretKey: endpoint
                - fromConnectionSecretKey: port
                - fromConnectionSecretKey: username
                - fromConnectionSecretKey: password
              base:
                apiVersion: helm.crossplane.io/v1beta1
                kind: Release
              # See example above for further details
              ...
        plans:
          small:
            uuid: 43905323-ed5f-466a-9d7f-ddc16cb74864
            description: Foo instance small size
            cluster: prod-cluster-01
            metadata:
              displayName: Small
              memory: 1Gi
              storageCapacity: 8Gi
            resources:
              01_foo-helm-chart:
                base:
                  spec:
                    forProvider:
                      values:
                        configmap: |
                          maxmemory 768mb
                        resources:
                          requests:
                            cpu: 1000m
                            memory: 1Gi
                          limits:
                            cpu: 2000m
                            memory: 1Gi
          medium:
            uuid: 4e4045a3-7099-4645-a3a4-50f3df10a7a5
            description: Foo instance medium size
            cluster: prod-cluster-02
            metadata:
              displayName: Medium
              memory: 2Gi
              storageCapacity: 16Gi
            resources:
              01_foo-helm-chart:
                base:
                  spec:
                    forProvider:
                      values:
                        configmap: |
                          maxmemory 1512mb
                        resources:
                          requests:
                            cpu: 1000m
                            memory: 2Gi
                          limits:
                            cpu: 2000m
                            memory: 2Gi
----


== Update Broker Implementation

Some code changes on the https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker[crossplane-service-broker] are necessary to introduce a new service offering. To support a new service offering the `ServiceBinder` interface must be implemented and optionally the `ProvisionValidater`.

The simplest example is the https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker/blob/master/pkg/crossplane/service_redis.go[implementation] for the Redis service as it only implements the `GetBinding()` function.

To make use of the newly implemented interface, the `ServiceBinderFactory()` function https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker/blob/master/pkg/crossplane/services.go[here] must be updated with the name and constructor of the new service.

The following is an example pull request to implement the Foo service: https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker/pull/39

Commit message:

Apply suggestions from code review
Co-authored-by: Chris <github.account@chrigel.net>

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/implement_new_service_offering.adoc, after:

= How to Implement a new Service Offering

This page describes the steps which are necessary to implement a new service offering based on Crossplane and the https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker[crossplane-service-broker].

We use the fictional `Foo` service in the following examples and a fictional Helm chart `foo-chart`.


== Create Crossplane Resources

The main work to implement a new service offering is creating the required Crossplane resources.
This includes a _CompositeResourceDefinition_ (XRD) and one _Composition_ per offered plan.

See the xref:explanations/crossplane_service_broker.adoc[Crossplane Service Broker explanation] on how these resources map to the open service broker concepts.

See the https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.1/concepts/composition.html[Crossplane documentation] on more general information regarding Crossplane and its different resources.

=== CompositeResourceDefinition (XRD)
The XRD resource defines a new service offering.
You can use a name of your choosing, the Crossplane best practice defines a naming scheme of `Composite<NAME>Instance`.

==== Metadata
Make sure the following labels are set (see xref:explanations/crossplane_service_broker.adoc#metadata[metadata]):

* `service.syn.tools/id`: Generate a new UUID
* `service.syn.tools/name`: Name of the new service offering

To add further metadata you can use the following annotations:

* `service.syn.tools/description`: Description for the new service offering
* `service.syn.tools/metadata`: JSON object with further https://github.com/openservicebrokerapi/servicebroker/blob/master/spec.md#service-offering-object[metadata]

==== Connection Details
Define which information an application needs in order to be able to connect and use this service offering by using the `.spec.connectionSecretKeys` list.
Usually this includes an endpoint (IP address or hostname), a port as well as credentials (username/password).

==== Printer Columns
Defining https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#additional-printer-columns[printer columns] can help in troubleshooting by showing relevant information.
Configure printer columns for the `Plan` and `Cluster`.

==== Example
[source,yaml]
----
kind: CompositeResourceDefinition
metadata:
  name: compositefooinstances.syn.tools
  labels:
    service.syn.tools/id: 6ca63cdb-0cfa-4c5e-b080-72f22ff5f3e6 # uuidgen | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]'
    service.syn.tools/name: foo-k8s
    service.syn.tools/updatable: 'true'
  annotations:
    service.syn.tools/description: Foo high performance database for big data machine learning.
    service.syn.tools/metadata: |
      {
        "displayName": "Foo DB on K8s",
        "version": "1.3.37"
      }
    service.syn.tools/tags: |
      ["foo", "ml", "bigdata", "bar"]
spec:
  connectionSecretKeys:
    - endpoint
    - port
    - username
    - password
  group: syn.tools
  names:
    kind: CompositeFooInstance
    plural: compositefooinstances
  versions:
    - name: v1
      referenceable: true
      served: true
      additionalPrinterColumns:
        - jsonPath: .metadata.labels['service\.syn\.tools/plan']
          name: Plan
          type: string
        - jsonPath: .metadata.labels['service\.syn\.tools/cluster']
          name: Cluster
          type: string
----

=== Compositions
The Compositions define the "building blocks" how the service offering is being provisioned.
See the https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.1/concepts/composition.html[Crossplane documentation] for further information how they work and play together with XRDs and XRs.

Each offered plan of a service is defined in a Composition.

==== Metadata
The name of a composition must be its UUID.
Make sure the following labels are set (see xref:explanations/crossplane_service_broker.adoc#metadata[metadata]):

* `service.syn.tools/plan`: Name of the plan
* `service.syn.tools/cluster`: Name of the cluster this plan should be provisioned
* `service.syn.tools/id`: UUID of the service this plan belongs to
* `service.syn.tools/name`: Name of the service this plan belongs to
* `service.syn.tools/updatable`: If the service instances can be updated

To add further metadata you can use the following annotations:

* `service.syn.tools/description`: Description for this plan
* `service.syn.tools/metadata`: JSON object with further https://github.com/openservicebrokerapi/servicebroker/blob/master/spec.md#service-plan-object[metadata]

==== Resources
A Composition defines a list of K8s resources which should be created for each instance of this plan.
These resources together build the provisioned instance and usually consist of `Release` resources which the https://github.com/crossplane-contrib/provider-helm[provider-helm] then installs accordingly.

Patches can be used to further parametrize the resources and use information on the XR as input for further templating.

==== Example
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1
kind: Composition
metadata:
  name: 43905323-ed5f-466a-9d7f-ddc16cb74864 # uuidgen | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]'
  labels:
    service.syn.tools/cluster: prod-cluster-01
    service.syn.tools/id: 6ca63cdb-0cfa-4c5e-b080-72f22ff5f3e6 # This is the ID from 'compositefooinstances.syn.tools' above
    service.syn.tools/name: foo-k8s
    service.syn.tools/plan: small
    service.syn.tools/updatable: "true"
  annotations:
    service.syn.tools/description: Foo instance small size
    service.syn.tools/metadata: |
      {
        "displayName": "Small",
        "memory": "1Gi",
        "storageCapacity": "8Gi"
      }
spec:
  compositeTypeRef:
    apiVersion: syn.tools/v1
    kind: CompositeFooInstance
  writeConnectionSecretsToNamespace: crossplane-system # Namespace to collect all connection secrets
  resources:
    - connectionDetails:
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: endpoint
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: port
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: username
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: password
      base:
        apiVersion: helm.crossplane.io/v1beta1
        kind: Release
        spec:
          # Read back information from provisioned K8s resources in the target namespace
          connectionDetails:
            - apiVersion: v1
              kind: Service
              name: foo-master
              fieldPath: status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip
              toConnectionSecretKey: endpoint
            - apiVersion: v1
              kind: Service
              name: foo-master
              fieldPath: spec.ports[0].port
              toConnectionSecretKey: port
            - apiVersion: v1
              kind: Secret
              name: foo-admin
              fieldPath: data.username
              toConnectionSecretKey: username
            - apiVersion: v1
              kind: Secret
              name: foo-admin
              fieldPath: data.password
              toConnectionSecretKey: password
          writeConnectionSecretToRef:
            namespace: crossplane-system
          forProvider:
            chart:
              name: foo-chart
              repository: https://charts.example.com
              version: 1.3.37
            values:
              fullnameOverride: foo
              service:
                type: LoadBalancer
              resources:
                requests:
                  cpu: 1000m
                  memory: 1Gi
                limits:
                  cpu: 2000m
                  memory: 1Gi
          rollbackLimit: 3
      patches:
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.annotations
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.forProvider.namespace
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[service.syn.tools/cluster]
          toFieldPath: spec.providerConfigRef.name
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.writeConnectionSecretToRef.name
          transforms:
            - string:
                fmt: "%s-foo"
              type: string
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.connectionDetails[0].namespace
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.connectionDetails[1].namespace
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.connectionDetails[2].namespace
        - fromFieldPath: metadata.labels[crossplane.io/composite]
          toFieldPath: spec.connectionDetails[3].namespace
----

=== Commodore Component

To simplify the creation of these Crossplane resources the https://git.vshn.net/swisscompks/component-spks-crossplane[spks-crossplane component] exists.
It will generate the required resources based on the configured input in the configuration hierarchy.

This approach especially helps in defining multiple plans in order to keep the config more DRY and maintainable.

==== Example
This example setup will generate the same Crossplane resources as showcased in the previous examples.
[source,yaml]
----
parameters:
  spks_crossplane:
    serviceDefinitions:
      foo-k8s:
        uuid: 6ca63cdb-0cfa-4c5e-b080-72f22ff5f3e6
        description: Foo high performance database for big data machine learning.
        metadata:
          displayName: Foo DB on K8s
          version: 1.3.37
        tags:
          - foo
          - ml
          - bigdata
          - bar
        updatable: "true"
        xrd: CompositeFooInstance
        connectionSecretKeys:
          - endpoint
          - port
          - username
          - password
        versions:
          - name: v1
            served: true
            referenceable: true
            additionalPrinterColumns:
              - jsonPath: .metadata.labels['service\.syn\.tools/plan']
                name: Plan
                type: string
              - jsonPath: .metadata.labels['service\.syn\.tools/cluster']
                name: Cluster
                type: string
        baseComposition:
          writeConnectionSecretsToNamespace: crossplane-system
          resources:
            01_foo-helm-chart:
              connectionDetails:
                - fromConnectionSecretKey: endpoint
                - fromConnectionSecretKey: port
                - fromConnectionSecretKey: username
                - fromConnectionSecretKey: password
              base:
                apiVersion: helm.crossplane.io/v1beta1
                kind: Release
              # See example above for further details
              ...
        plans:
          small:
            uuid: 43905323-ed5f-466a-9d7f-ddc16cb74864
            description: Foo instance small size
            cluster: prod-cluster-01
            metadata:
              displayName: Small
              memory: 1Gi
              storageCapacity: 8Gi
            resources:
              01_foo-helm-chart:
                base:
                  spec:
                    forProvider:
                      values:
                        configmap: |
                          maxmemory 768mb
                        resources:
                          requests:
                            cpu: 1000m
                            memory: 1Gi
                          limits:
                            cpu: 2000m
                            memory: 1Gi
          medium:
            uuid: 4e4045a3-7099-4645-a3a4-50f3df10a7a5
            description: Foo instance medium size
            cluster: prod-cluster-02
            metadata:
              displayName: Medium
              memory: 2Gi
              storageCapacity: 16Gi
            resources:
              01_foo-helm-chart:
                base:
                  spec:
                    forProvider:
                      values:
                        configmap: |
                          maxmemory 1512mb
                        resources:
                          requests:
                            cpu: 1000m
                            memory: 2Gi
                          limits:
                            cpu: 2000m
                            memory: 2Gi
----


== Update Broker Implementation

Some code changes on the https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker[crossplane-service-broker] are necessary to introduce a new service offering. To support a new service offering the `ServiceBinder` interface must be implemented and optionally the `ProvisionValidater`.

The simplest example is the https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker/blob/master/pkg/crossplane/service_redis.go[implementation] for the Redis service as it only implements the `GetBinding()` function.

To make use of the newly implemented interface, the `ServiceBinderFactory()` function https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker/blob/master/pkg/crossplane/services.go[here] must be updated with the name and constructor of the new service.

The following is an example pull request to implement the Foo service: https://github.com/vshn/crossplane-service-broker/pull/39
