docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/crossplane/enable_plan_upgrade.adoc, before:

= Enable Plan Upgrades

This page describes the steps which are necessary to enable plan upgrades for both MariaDB and Redis.

== Concepts

Service plans consist of two different parts.
The plan size and its SLA.

We currently have two SLA levels: `standard` and `premium`. 
Regardless of the following setup, SLA changes can always be done. 

There are currently providing five different plan sizes:

* `xsmall`
* `small`
* `medium`
* `large`
* `xlarge`

You can look at the corresponding xref:app-catalog:ROOT:redis.adoc[Redis] or xref:app-catalog:ROOT:mariadb_galera.adoc[MariaDB] pages to see what these translate to.
Plan size changes are only supported if the following setup has been done.
Updates are only valid from smaller to bigger plan sizes.
Shrinking a service instance isn't supported.

This ultimately means a plan change from `xsmall-standard` to `large-premium` or from `small-premium` to  `medium-standard` is valid.
A plan change from `xlarge-premium` to `small-standard` however isn't.

[NOTE]
====
While the Service Broker will check that the plan change is valid before applying it, Crossplane has no such guardrails.
If you change the composition of a Composite Resource it will happily try to change the plan, but will fail.
====

== StatefulSet Resize Controller

As the name should tell you the https://github.com/vshn/statefulset-resize-controller[StatefulSet Resize Controller] manages the resizing of StatefulSets.
It needs to be deployed on every cluster running the actual service workload.

Whenever a StatefulSet is updated to request a larger persistent volume, the controller will scale down the StatfulSet, resize its volumes, move the existing data, and scale it back up.

=== Deployment

== Composition

The Crossplane composition need to support changing resource requirements of StatefulSets.
This is only supported with version ??

== Service Broker

To expose the plan upgrade capabilities as part of the Open Service Broker API, the feature needs to be explicitly enabled.
This is done by setting `OSB_ALLOW_PLAN_UPGRADES` to `true`.


[NOTE]
====
This should only ever be enabled if both the StatefulSets Resize Controller deployment and the Composition update have been successful.
Enabling plan upgrades at the broker, without these updates can lead to unexpected issues when trying to upgrade plan.
====

Commit message:

Update doc for different plan size change config

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/crossplane/enable_plan_upgrade.adoc, after:

= Enable Plan Upgrades

This page describes the steps which are necessary to enable plan upgrades for both MariaDB and Redis.

== Concepts

Service plans consist of two different parts.
The plan size and its SLA.

We currently have two SLA levels: `standard` and `premium`. 
SLA changes can be configured separately and doesn't need any of the setup described below.

We're currently supporting five different plan sizes:

* `xsmall`
* `small`
* `medium`
* `large`
* `xlarge`

You can look at the corresponding xref:app-catalog:ROOT:redis.adoc[Redis] or xref:app-catalog:ROOT:mariadb_galera.adoc[MariaDB] pages to see what these translate to.
Plan size changes are only supported if the following setup has been done.
Updates are only valid from smaller to bigger plan sizes.
Shrinking a service instance isn't supported.


[NOTE]
====
It's configurable which plan changes the Service Broker will allow. 
If the Service Broker is configured to for example allow a plan change from `large` to `small`, it will happily try to change the plan.
So will the Crossplane Composition, but it will fail.

Please make sure to now allow invalid plan changes when configuring the Service Broker.
====

== StatefulSet Resize Controller

As the name should tell you the https://github.com/vshn/statefulset-resize-controller[StatefulSet Resize Controller] manages the resizing of StatefulSets.
It needs to be deployed on every cluster running the actual service workload.

Whenever a StatefulSet is updated to request a larger persistent volume, the controller will scale down the StatfulSet, resize its volumes, move the existing data, and scale it back up.


== Composition

The Crossplane composition need to support changing resource requirements of StatefulSets.

== Service Broker

To expose the plan size upgrade capabilities as part of the Open Service Broker API, the feature needs to be explicitly enabled.
Plan size upgrades are only supported the  `crossplane-service-broker v0.6.0` or higher and the `swisscom-service-broker v0.5.0` or higher.
The feature can be enabled by configuring the allowed plan size changes by setting the `OSB_PLAN_UPDATE_SIZE_RULES` environment variable.

The environment variable takes a white-list of allowed plan size changes in the form of `xsmall>small|xsmall>medium`, which would allow upgrades from `xsmall` to `small` or `medium` and deny all other plan size changes.
The list isn't transitive, so it will deny changes from `xsmall` to `medium`.
It's possible to allow changes to smaller plan sizes, for example `medium>small`, these changes however aren't valid and will fail.


[NOTE]
====
This should only ever be enabled if both the StatefulSets Resize Controller deployment and the Composition update have been successful.
Enabling plan upgrades at the broker, without these updates can lead to unexpected issues when trying to upgrade plan.
====

include::../crossplane_service_broker/setup_crossplane_service_broker.adoc[tag=note_update_rule,leveloffset=+1]
